oxford world ’s classics

THE QUR  AN
The Qur  an is the supreme authority in Islam. It is the fundamental and
paramount source of the creed, rituals, ethics, and laws of the Islamic religion.
This supreme status stems from the belief that the Qur an is the word of God,
revealed to the Prophet Muhammad via the archangel Gabriel, and intended
for all times and all places.
The Qur an was the starting point for all the Islamic sciences, which were
developed in order to study its grammar, pronunciation, and style, and it is the
basis of Islamic law and theology; indeed, as the celebrated ﬁfteenth-century
scholar and author Suyuti said, ‘Everything is based on the Qur an’. The
entire religious life of the Muslim world is built around the text of the Qur an.
As a consequence of the Qur an, the Arabic language moved far beyond
the Arabian peninsula, deeply penetrating many other languages within the
Muslim lands––Persian, Turkish, Urdu, Indonesian, and others. The ﬁrst sura
(or section) of the Qur an, al-Fatiha, which is an essential part of the ritual
prayers, is learned and read in Arabic by Muslims in all parts of the world, and
many other verses and phrases in Arabic are also incorporated into the lives of
non-Arabic-speaking Muslims.
M. A. S. Abdel Haleem was born in Egypt, and learned the Qur an by heart
from childhood. Educated at al-Azhar, Cairo, and Cambridge Universities,
he has taught Arabic at Cambridge and London Universities since 1966,
including courses in advanced practical translation and the Qur an. He is now
Professor of Islamic Studies at the School of Oriental and African Studies,
University of London. His most recent publications are Understanding
the Qur an: Themes and Style (2001) and English Translations of the Qur an:
The Making of an Image (2004). He is also working on An Arabic–English
Dictionary of Qur anic Usage, with El-Said Badawi. He is the editor of the
Journal of Qur anic Studies and the London Qur anic Studies series.

oxford world’s classics
For over 100 years Oxford World’s Classics have brought
readers closer to the world’s great literature. Now with over 700
titles–– from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the
twentieth century’s greatest novels–– the series makes available
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing.
The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene,
and other literary ﬁgures which enriched the experience of reading.
Today the series is recognized for its ﬁne scholarship and
reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry,
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive
commentary and essential background information to meet the
changing needs of readers.

OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS

The Qur an
A new translation by
M. A. S. ABDEL HALEEM

1

3

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oﬃces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan South Korea Poland Portugal
Singapore Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© M. A. S. Abdel Haleem 2004, 2005
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2004
First published, with corrections, as an Oxford World’s Classics paperback 2005
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Koran. English.
The Qur an / a new translation by M. A. S. Abdel Haleem.
p. cm. –– (Oxford world’s classics)
Originally published: 2004.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
I. Abdel Haleem, M. A. II. Title. III. Oxford world’s classics (Oxford University Press)
BP109 2005

297.1′22521––dc22

2004030574
ISBN 0–19–283193–3
1
Typeset in Ehrhardt
by ReﬁneCatch Limited, Bungay, Suﬀolk
Printed in Great Britain by
Clays Ltd, St Ives plc

CONTENTS
Introduction
The Life of Muhammad and the Historical Background
The Revelation of the Qur an
The Compilation of the Qur an
The Structure of the Qur an: Suras and Ayas
Stylistic Features
Issues of Interpretation
A Short History of English Translations
This Translation

ix
x
xiv
xv
xvi
xix
xxi
xxvi
xxix

A Chronology of the Qur an

xxxvii

Select Bibliography

xxxix

Map of Arabia at the Time of the Revelation

xliii

THE QUR  AN
1. The Opening (Al-Fatiha)
2. The Cow (Al-Baqara)
3. The Family of  Imran (Al- Imran)
4. Women (Al-Nisa )
5. The Feast (Al-Ma ida)
6. Livestock (Al-An am)
7. The Heights (Al-A raf )
8. Battle Gains (Al-Anfal)
9. Repentance (Al-Tawba)
10. Jonah (Yunus)
11. Hud (Hud)
12. Joseph (Yusuf )
13. Thunder (Al-Ra d )
14. Abraham (Ibrahim)
15. Al-Hijr (Al-Hijr)
16. The Bee (Al-Nahl)
17. The Night Journey (Al-Isra )
18. The Cave (Al-Kahf )
19. Mary (Maryam)

3
4
34
50
67
80
94
110
116
128
136
145
153
158
162
166
175
183
191

vi

Contents

20. Ta Ha (Ta Ha)
21. The Prophets (Al-Anbiya )
22. The Pilgrimage (Al-Hajj)
23. The Believers (Al-Mu minun)
24. Light (Al-Nur)
25. The Diﬀerentiator (Al-Furqan)
26. The Poets (Al-Shu ara )
27. The Ants (Al-Naml)
28. The Story (Al-Qasas)
29. The Spider (Al- Ankabut)
30. The Byzantines (Al-Rum)
31. Luqman (Luqman)
32. Bowing down in Worship (Al-Sajda)
33. The Joint Forces (Al-Ahzab)
34. Sheba (Saba )
35. The Creator (Fatir)
36. Ya Sin (Ya Sin)
37. Ranged in Rows (Al-Saﬀat)
38. Sad (Sad)
39. The Throngs (Al-Zumar)
40. The Forgiver (Ghaﬁr)
41. [Verses] Made Distinct (Fussilat)
42. Consultation (Al-Shura)
43. Ornaments of Gold (Al-Zukhruf )
44. Smoke (Al-Dukhan)
45. Kneeling (Al-Jathiya)
46. The Sand Dunes (Al-Ahqaf )
47. Muhammad (Muhammad)
48. Triumph (Al-Fath)
49. The Private Rooms (Al-Hujurat)
50. Qaf (Qaf )
51. Scattering [Winds] (Al-Dhariyat)
52. The Mountain (Al-Tur)
53. The Star (Al-Najm)
54. The Moon (Al-Qamar)
55. The Lord of Mercy (Al-Rahman)
56. That which is Coming (Al-Waqi a)
57. Iron (Al-Hadid)
58. The Dispute (Al-Mujadala)

196
203
209
215
220
227
232
239
245
252
257
261
264
266
272
277
281
285
290
295
301
307
311
316
321
324
327
331
334
338
340
343
345
347
350
353
356
359
362

Contents
59. The Gathering [of Forces] (Al-Hashr)
60. Women Tested (Al-Mumtahana)
61. Solid Lines (Al-Saﬀ )
62. The Day of Congregation (Al-Jumu a)
63. The Hypocrites (Al-Munaﬁqun)
64. Mutual Neglect (Al-Taghabun)
65. Divorce (Al-Talaq)
66. Prohibition (Al-Tahrim)
67. Control (Al-Mulk)
68. The Pen (Al-Qalam)
69. The Inevitable Hour (Al-Haqqa)
70. The Ways of Ascent (Al-Ma arij)
71. Noah (Nuh)
72. The Jinn (Al-Jinn)
73. Enfolded (Al-Muzzammil)
74. Wrapped in his Cloak (Al-Muddaththir)
75. The Resurrection (Al-Qiyama)
76. Man (Al-Insan)
77. [Winds] Sent Forth (Al-Mursalat)
78. The Announcement (Al-Naba )
79. The Forceful Chargers (Al-Nazi at)
80. He Frowned ( Abasa)
81. Shrouded in Darkness (Al-Takwir)
82. Torn Apart (Al-Inﬁtar)
83. Those who Give Short Measure (Al-Mutaﬃﬁn)
84. Ripped Apart (Al-Inshiqaq)
85. The Towering Constellations (Al-Buruj)
86. The Night-Comer (Al-Tariq)
87. The Most High (Al-A la)
88. The Overwhelming Event (Al-Ghashiya)
89. Daybreak (Al-Fajr)
90. The City (Al-Balad)
91. The Sun (Al-Shams)
92. The Night (Al-Layl)
93. The Morning Brightness (Al-Duha)
94. Relief (Al-Sharh)
95. The Fig (Al-Tin)
96. The Clinging Form (Al- Alaq)
97. The Night of Glory (Al-Qadr)

vii

365
368
370
372
374
376
378
380
382
384
387
389
391
393
395
397
399
401
403
405
407
409
411
412
413
415
416
417
418
419
420
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429

viii

Contents

98. Clear Evidence (Al-Bayyina)
99. The Earthquake (Al-Zalzala)
100. The Charging Steeds (Al- Adiyat)
101. The Crashing Blow (Al-Qari a)
102. Striving for More (Al-Takathur)
103. The Declining Day (Al- Asr)
104. The Backbiter (Al-Humaza)
105. The Elephant (Al-Fil)
106. Quraysh (Quraysh)
107. Common Kindnesses (Al-Ma un)
108. Abundance (Al-Kawthar)
109. The Disbelievers (Al-Kaﬁrun)
110. Help (Al-Nasr)
111. Palm Fibre (Al-Masad)
112. Purity [of Faith] (Al-Ikhlas)
113. Daybreak (Al-Falaq)
114. People (Al-Nas)

430
431
432
433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446

Index

447

I N T RO D U C T I O N
The Qur  an is the supreme authority in Islam. It is the fundamental and paramount source of the creed, rituals, ethics, and laws
of the Islamic religion. It is the book that ‘diﬀerentiates’ between
right and wrong, so that nowadays, when the Muslim world is
dealing with such universal issues as globalization, the environment, combating terrorism and drugs, issues of medical ethics, and
feminism, evidence to support the various arguments is sought in
the Qur an. This supreme status stems from the belief that the
Qur an is the word of God, revealed to the Prophet Muhammad via
the archangel Gabriel, and intended for all times and all places.
The Qur an was the starting point for all the Islamic sciences:
Arabic grammar was developed to serve the Qur an, the study of
Arabic phonetics was pursued in order to determine the exact pronunciation of Qur anic words, the science of Arabic rhetoric was
developed in order to describe the features of the inimitable style of
the Qur an, the art of Arabic calligraphy was cultivated through
writing down the Qur an, the Qur an is the basis of Islamic law and
theology; indeed, as the celebrated ﬁfteenth-century scholar
and author Suyuti said, ‘Everything is based on the Qur an’. The
entire religious life of the Muslim world is built around the text of
the Qur an. As a consequence of the Qur an, the Arabic language
moved far beyond the Arabian peninsula, deeply penetrating many
other languages within the Muslim lands––Persian, Turkish, Urdu,
Indonesian, and others. The ﬁrst sura (or section) of the Qur an,
al-Fatiha, which is an essential part of the ritual prayers, is learned
and read in Arabic by Muslims in all parts of the world, and many
other verses and phrases in Arabic are also incorporated into the
lives of non-Arabic-speaking Muslims.
Muslim children start to learn portions of the Qur an by heart in
their normal schooling: the tradition of learning the entire Qur an by
heart started during the lifetime of the Prophet and continues to the
present day. A person attaining this distinction becomes known as a
haﬁz, and this is still a prerequisite for admission to certain religious
schools in Muslim countries. Nowadays the Qur an is recited a
number of times daily on the radio and television in the Muslim

x

Introduction

world, and some Muslim countries devote a broadcasting channel
for long hours daily exclusively to the recitation and study of
the Qur an. Muslims swear on the Qur an for solemn oaths in the
lawcourts and in everyday life.

The Life of Muhammad and the Historical Background
Muhammad was born in Mecca in about the year 570 ce. The
religion of most people in Mecca and Arabia at the beginning of
Muhammad’s lifetime was polytheism. Christianity was found in
places, notably in Yemen, and among the Arab tribes in the north
under Byzantine rule; Judaism too was practised in Yemen, and in
and around Yathrib, later renamed Madina (Medina), but the vast
majority of the population of Arabia were polytheists. They believed
in a chief god Allah, but saw other deities as mediators between
them and him: the Qur an mentions in particular the worship of
idols, angels, the sun, and the moon as ‘lesser’ gods. The Hajj
pilgrimage to the Ka ba in Mecca, built, the Qur an tells us, by
Abraham for the worship of the one God, was practised but that
too had become corrupted with polytheism. Mecca was thus an
important centre for religion, and for trade, with the caravans that
travelled via Mecca between Yemen in the south and Syria in the
north providing an important source of income. There was no central government. The harsh desert conditions brought competition
for scarce resources, and enforced solidarity within each tribe, but
there was frequent ﬁghting between tribes. Injustices were practised
against the weaker classes, particularly women, children, slaves, and
the poor.
Few hard facts are known about Muhammad’s childhood. It is
known that his father Abdullah died before he was born and his
mother Amina when he was 6 years old; that his grandfather Abdul
Muttalib then looked after him until, two years later, he too died. At
the age of 8, Muhammad entered the guardianship of his uncle Abu
Talib, who took him on a trade journey to the north when he was
12 years old. In his twenties, Muhammad was employed as a trader
by a wealthy and well-respected widow ﬁfteen years his senior named
Khadija. Impressed by his honesty and good character, she proposed
marriage to him. They were married for over twenty-ﬁve years until
Khadija’s death when Muhammad was some 49 years old. Khadija

Introduction

xi

was a great support to her husband. After his marriage, Muhammad
lived in Mecca, where he was a respected businessman and
peacemaker.
Muhammad was in the habit of taking regular periods of retreat
and reﬂection in the Cave of Hira outside Mecca. This is where the
ﬁrst revelation of the Qur an came to him in 610 ce, when he was
40 years old. This initiated his prophethood. The Prophet was
instructed to spread the teachings of the revelations he received to
his larger family and beyond. However, although a few believed in
him, the majority, especially the powerful, resented his calling them
to abandon their gods. After all, many polytheist tribes came to
Mecca on the pilgrimage, and the leaders feared that the new
religion would threaten their own prestige and economic prosperity.
They also felt it would disturb the social order, as it was quite
outspoken in its preaching of equality between all people and its
condemnation of the injustices done to the weaker members of the
society.
The hostility of the Meccans soon graduated from gentle ridicule
to open conﬂict and the persecution of Muhammad’s followers,
many of whom Muhammad sent, from the ﬁfth year of his
preaching, to seek refuge with the Christian king of Abyssinia
(Ethiopia). The remaining Muslims continued to be pressurized by
the Meccans, who instituted a total boycott against the Prophet’s
clan, refusing to allow any social or economic dealings with them. In
the middle of this hardship, Muhammad’s wife, Khadija, and his
uncle, Abu Talib, died, so depriving the Prophet of their great support. This year became known as the Year of Grief. However, events
were soon to take a change for the better. The Prophet experienced
the event known as the Night Journey and Ascension to Heaven,
during which Muhammad was accompanied by Gabriel from the
sanctuary of Mecca ﬁrst to Jerusalem and then to Heaven. Soon
afterwards, some people from Yathrib, a town some 400 km north of
Mecca, met Muhammad when they came to make the pilgrimage
and some of these accepted his faith; the following year more
returned from Yathrib, pledged to support him, and invited him and
his community to seek sanctuary in Yathrib. The Muslims began to
migrate there, soon followed by the Prophet himself, narrowly escaping an attempt to assassinate him. This move to Yathrib, known as
the Migration (Hijra), was later adopted as the start of the Muslim

xii

Introduction

calendar. Upon arrival in Yathrib, Muhammad built the ﬁrst mosque
in Islam, and he spent most of his time there, teaching and remoulding the characters of the new Muslims from unruly tribesmen into
a brotherhood of believers. Guided by the Qur an, he acted as
teacher, judge, arbitrator, adviser, consoler, and father-ﬁgure to the
new community. One of the reasons the people of Yathrib invited the
Prophet to migrate there was the hope that he would be a good
arbitrator between their warring tribes, as indeed proved to be
the case.
Settled in Yathrib, Muhammad made a pact of mutual solidarity
between the immigrants (muhajirun) and the Muslims of Yathrib,
known as the ansar––helpers. This alliance, based not on tribal but
on religious solidarity, was a departure from previous social norms.
Muhammad also made a larger pact between all the tribes of Yathrib,
that they would all support one another in defending the city against
attack. Each tribe would be equal under this arrangement, including
the Jews, and free to practise their own religions.
Islam spread quickly in Yathrib, which became known as Madinat
al-Nabi (the City of the Prophet) or simply Medina (city). This
was the period in which the revelations began to contain legislation
on all aspects of individual and communal life, as for the ﬁrst time
the Muslims had their own state. In the second year at Medina
(ah 2) a Qur anic revelation came allowing the Muslims to defend
themselves militarily (22: 38–41) and a number of battles against
the Meccan disbelievers and their allies took place near Medina,
starting with Badr shortly after this revelation, Uhud the following
year, and the Battle of the Trench in ah 5. The Qur an comments
on these events.
In ah 6 the Meccans prevented the Muslims from undertaking a
pilgrimage to Mecca. Negotiations followed, where the Muslims
accepted that they would return to Medina for the time being but
come back the following year to ﬁnish the pilgrimage. A truce was
agreed for ten years. However, in ah 8 a Meccan ally broke the
truce. The Muslims advanced to attack Mecca, but its leaders
accepted Islam and surrendered without a ﬁght. From this point
onwards, delegations started coming from all areas of Arabia to meet
the Prophet and make peace with him.
In ah 10 the Prophet made his last pilgrimage to Mecca and gave
a farewell speech on the Mount of Mercy, declaring equality and

Introduction

xiii

solidarity between all Muslims. By this time the whole Arabian
peninsula had accepted Islam and all the warring tribes were united
in one state under one head. Soon after his return to Medina in the
year 632 ce (ah 10), the Prophet received the last revelation of the
Qur an and, shortly thereafter, died. His role as leader of the Islamic
state was taken over by Abu Bakr (632–4 ce), followed by  Umar
(634–44) and  Uthman (644–56), who oversaw the phenomenal
spread of Islam beyond Arabia. They were followed by  Ali (656–61).
These four leaders are called the Rightly Guided Caliphs.
After  Ali, the ﬁrst political dynasty of Islam, the Umayyads
(661–750), came into power. There had, however, been some friction
within the Muslim community on the question of succession to the
Prophet after his death: the Shi is, or supporters of  Ali, felt that  Ali
and not Abu Bakr was the appropriate person to take on the mantle
of head of the community. They believed that the leadership should
then follow the line of descendants of the Prophet, through the
Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law  Ali. After  Ali’s death, they adopted
his sons Hasan and then Husayn as their leader or imam. After the
latter’s death in the Battle of Karbala in Iraq (680 ce/ah 61),
Husayn took on a special signiﬁcance for the Shi i community:
he is mourned every year on the Day of  Ashura. Some Shi i believe
that the Prophet’s line ended with the seventh imam Isma il (d. 762
ce/ah 145); others believe that the line continued as far as a
twelfth imam in the ninth century.
The Islamic state stretched by the end of its ﬁrst century from
Spain, across North Africa, to Sind in north-west India. In later
centuries it expanded further still to include large parts of East and
West Africa, India, Central and South-East Asia, and parts of China
and southern Europe. Muslim migrants like the Turks and Tartars
also spread into parts of northern Europe, such as Kazan and
Poland. After the Second World War there was another major inﬂux
of Muslims into all areas of the world, including Europe, America,
and Australia, and many people from these continents converted to
the new faith. The total population of Muslims is now estimated at
more than one billion (of which the great majority are Sunni), about
one-ﬁfth of the entire population of the world,1 and Islam is said to
be the fastest-growing religion in the world.
1

See http://www.iiie.net/Intl/PopStats.html.

xiv

Introduction

The Revelation of the Qur an
Muhammad’s own account survives of the extraordinary circumstances of the revelation, of being approached by an angel who
commanded him: ‘Read in the name of your Lord.’ 2 When he
explained that he could not read,3 the angel squeezed him strongly,
repeating the request twice, and then recited to him the ﬁrst two
lines of the Qur an.4 For the ﬁrst experience of revelation Muhammad was alone in the cave, but after that the circumstances in which
he received revelations were witnessed by others and recorded.
When he experienced the ‘state of revelation’, those around him
were able to observe his visible, audible, and sensory reactions. His
face would become ﬂushed and he would fall silent and appear as if
his thoughts were far away, his body would become limp as if he were
asleep, a humming sound would be heard about him, and sweat
would appear on his face, even on winter days. This state would last
for a brief period and as it passed the Prophet would immediately
recite new verses of the Qur an. The revelation could descend on
him as he was walking, sitting, riding, or giving a sermon, and there
were occasions when he waited anxiously for it for over a month in
answer to a question he was asked, or in comment on an event: the
state was clearly not the Prophet’s to command. The Prophet and his
followers understood these signs as the experience accompanying
the communication of Qur anic verses by the Angel of Revelation
(Gabriel), while the Prophet’s adversaries explained them as magic
or as a sign of his ‘being possessed’.
It is worth noting that the Qur an has itself recorded all claims and
attacks made against it and against the Prophet in his lifetime, but
for many of Muhammad’s contemporaries the fact that the ﬁrst word
of the Qur an was an imperative addressed to the Prophet (‘Read’)
These words appear at the beginning of Sura 96 of the Qur an.
Moreover, until the ﬁrst revelation came to him in the cave, Muhammad was not
known to have composed any poem or given any speech. The Qur an employs this fact in
arguing with the unbelievers: ‘If God had so willed, I would not have recited it to you,
nor would He have made it known to you. I lived a whole lifetime among you before it
came to me. How can you not use your reason?’ (10: 16). Among other things this is
taken by Muslims as proof of the Qur an’s divine source.
4 The concepts of ‘reading’, ‘learning/knowing’, and ‘the pen’ occur six times in
these two lines. As Muslim writers on education point out (e.g. S. Qutb, Fi Dhilal
al-Qur an (Cairo, 1985), vi. 3939), the revelation of the Qur an began by talking about
reading, teaching, knowing, and writing.
2
3

Introduction

xv

linguistically made the authorship of the text outside Muhammad.
Indeed, this mode is maintained throughout the Qur an: it talks to
the Prophet or talks about him; never does the Prophet pass comment or speak for himself. The Qur an describes itself as a scripture
that God ‘sent down’ to the Prophet (the expression ‘sent down’, in
its various forms, is used in the Qur an well over 200 times) and, in
Arabic, this word conveys immediately, and in itself, the concept
that the origin of the Qur an is from above and that Muhammad is
merely a recipient. God is the one to speak in the Qur an: Muhammad is addressed, ‘Prophet’, ‘Messenger’, ‘Do’, ‘Do not do’, ‘They
ask you . . .’, ‘Say’ (the word ‘say’ is used in the Qur an well over
300 times). Moreover, the Prophet is sometimes even censured in
the Qur an.5 His status is unequivocally deﬁned as ‘Messenger’
(rasul).
The ﬁrst revelation consisted of the two lines which began the
Qur an and the mission of the Prophet, after which he had no further
experience of revelation for some while. Then another short piece
was revealed, and between then and shortly before the Prophet’s
death in 632 ce at the age of 63 (lunar years), the whole text of
the Qur an was revealed gradually, piece by piece, in varying
lengths, giving new teaching or commenting on events or answering
questions, according to circumstances.

The Compilation of the Qur an
With every new revelation, the Prophet would recite the new
addition to the Qur an to those around him, who would eagerly learn
it and in turn recite it to others. Throughout his mission the Prophet
repeatedly recited the Qur an to his followers and was meticulous in
ensuring that the Qur an was recorded,6 even in the days of persecution. As each new piece was revealed, Gabriel instructed the Prophet
as to where it should go in the ﬁnal corpus. An inner circle of his
followers wrote down verses of the Qur an as they learned them from
9: 43; 80: 1–11.
The word qur an means ‘reading/reciting’ and came to refer to ‘the text which is
read/recited’. The Muslim scripture often calls itself kitab ‘writing’, and this came to
refer to ‘the written book’. Thus the signiﬁcance of uttering and writing the revealed
scripture is emphasized from the very beginning of Islam, and is locked in the very
nouns that designate the Qur an.
5
6

xvi

Introduction

the Prophet and there are records of there being a total of twentynine scribes for this. By the end of the Prophet’s life (632 ce) the
entire Qur an was written down in the form of uncollated pieces. In
addition, most followers learned parts of it by heart and many
learned all of it from the Prophet over years spent in his company.7
They also learned from the Prophet the correct ordering of the
Qur anic material.8 They belonged to a cultural background that had
a long-standing tradition of memorizing literature, history, and
genealogy.
The standard Muslim account is that, during the second year after
the Prophet’s death (633 ce) and following the Battle of Yamama, in
which a number of those who knew the Qur an by heart died, it was
feared that with the gradual passing away of such men there was a
danger of some Qur anic material being lost. Therefore the ﬁrst caliph
and successor to the Prophet, Abu Bakr, ordered that a written copy of
the whole body of Qur anic material as arranged by the Prophet and
memorized by the Muslims should be made and safely stored with
him.9 About twelve years later, with the expansion of the Islamic state,
the third caliph,  Uthman, ordered that a number of copies should be
made from this to be distributed to diﬀerent parts of the Muslim
world as the oﬃcial copy of the Qur an, which became known as the
 Uthmanic Codex. This codex has been recognized throughout
the Muslim world for the last fourteen centuries as the authentic
document of the Qur an as revealed to the Prophet Muhammad.

The Structure of the Qur an: Suras and Ayas
As explained above, Qur anic revelation came to the Prophet
gradually, piece by piece, over a period of twenty-three years.
Material was placed in diﬀerent sections, not in chronological order
See Subhi al-Salih, Mabahith ﬁ  Ulum al-Qur an (Beirut, 1981), 65–7.
During the last twenty-ﬁve years there have been some views contesting this
traditional history of the Qur an and maintaining that it was canonized at a later date.
The reader can consult a survey and discussion of these views in Angelika Neuwirth,
‘The Qur an and History: A Disputed Relationship’, Journal of Qur anic Studies, 5/1
(2003), 1–18. Also see H. Motzki, ‘The Collection of the Qur an: A Reconsideration of
Western Views in Light of Recent Methodological Developments’, Der Islam (2001),
2–34.
9 The written fragments were another important source for the collation of this
‘canonical’ document.
7
8

Introduction

xvii

of revelation, but according to how they were to be read by the
Prophet and believers. The Qur an is divided into 114 sections of
varying lengths, the longest (section 2) being around twenty pages in
Arabic, the shortest (sections 108 and 112) being one line in Arabic
each. These sections are each known in Arabic as sura, and we will
use this word to refer to them.
Each sura (with the exception of Sura 9) begins with ‘In the
Name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy’, and a sura
consists of a number of verses each known in Arabic as an aya.
Again, an aya can run into several lines and consist of several
sentences, or it can be one single word, but it normally ends in
Arabic with a rhyme.
The titles of the suras require some explanation. Many suras
combine several subjects within them, as will be explained below
under ‘Stylistic Features’, and the titles were allocated on the basis
of either the main theme within the sura, an important event that
occurs in the sura, or a signiﬁcant word that appears within it. The
introductions to the suras in this translation are intended to help the
reader in this respect.
Meccan and Medinan Suras
The Qur anic material revealed to the Prophet in Mecca is distinguished by scholars from the material that came after the
Migration (Hijra) to Medina. In the Meccan period, the Qur an was
concerned mainly with the basic beliefs in Islam––the unity of God
as evidenced by His ‘signs’ (ayat),10 the prophethood of Muhammad,
and the Resurrection and Final Judgement––and these themes are
reiterated again and again for emphasis and to reinforce Qur anic
teachings. These issues were especially pertinent to the Meccans.
Most of them believed in more than one god. The Qur an refers to
this as shirk (partnership): the sharing of several gods in the creation
and government of the universe. The reader will note the frequent
use of ‘partnership’ and ‘associate’ throughout the Qur an. The
Meccans also initially denied the truth of Muhammad’s message,
and the Qur an refers to earlier prophets (many of them also mentioned in the Bible, for instance Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph,

10

See e.g. 25: 1–33; 27: 59 ﬀ.; 30: 17 ﬀ.; 41: 53.

xviii

Introduction

Moses, and Jesus),11 in order both to reassure the Prophet and his
followers that they will be saved, and to warn their opponents that
they will be punished. The Qur an stresses that all these prophets
preached the same message and that the Qur an was sent to conﬁrm
the earlier messages. It states that Muslims should believe in all of
them without making any distinction between them (2: 285). The
Meccans likewise could not conceive of the Resurrection of the
Dead. In the Meccan suras the Qur an gives arguments from embryology and from nature in general (36: 76–83; 56: 47–96; 22: 5–10) to
explain how the Resurrection can and will take place; the Qur an
seeks always to convince by reference to history, to what happened to
earlier generations, by explanations from nature, and through logic.
In the Medinan suras, by which time the Muslims were no longer
the persecuted minority but an established community with the
Prophet as its leader, the Qur an begins to introduce laws to govern
the Muslim community with regard to marriage, commerce and
ﬁnance, international relations, war and peace. Examples of these
can be found in Suras 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9. This era also witnessed the
emergence of a new group, the munaﬁqun or hypocrites, who pretended to profess Islam but were actually working against the Islamic
state, and these ‘hypocrites’ are a frequent theme in the Medinan
suras. We also see here discussion of the ‘People of the Book’ with
particular reference to Jewish and Christian communities, both those
contemporary with the Prophet and those in the past. It will be seen
that the Qur an tends to speak of groups or classes of people rather
than individuals.
Throughout the Meccan and Medinan suras the beliefs and
morals of the Qur an are put forward and emphasized, and these
form the bulk of Qur anic material; the percentage of strictly legal
texts in the Qur an is very small indeed. The Qur an contains some
6,200 verses and out of these only 100 deal with ritual practices, 70
verses discuss personal laws, 70 verses civil laws, 30 penal laws, and
20 judiciary matters and testimony.12 Moreover, these tend to deal
with general principles such as justice, kindness, and charity, rather
than detailed laws: even legal matters are explained in language that
appeals to the emotions, conscience, and belief in God. In verses
dealing with retaliation (2: 178–9), once the principles are established
11
12

See e.g. 2: 136; 3: 84–5; 6: 83–90; 42: 13.
A. Khallaf, A Concise History of Islamic Legislation [Arabic] (Kuwait, 1968), 28–9.

Introduction

xix

the text goes on to soften the hearts of both parties: oﬀender and
victims. In introducing the obligation of the fast of Ramadan (2: 183–
7), the aim throughout is to make the fast seem easy and highly
desirable, and it is indeed perceived this way by Muslims. The
month of Ramadan is a time of festivity and rejoicing.

Stylistic Features
The Qur an has its own style. It may be useful to readers to mention
some of the important features of this style. The reader should not
expect the Qur an to be arranged chronologically or by subject matter. The Qur an may present, in the same sura, material about the
unity and grace of God, regulations and laws, stories of earlier
prophets and nations and the lessons that can be drawn from these,
and descriptions of rewards and punishments on the Day of Judgement. This stylistic feature serves to reinforce the message, to persuade and to dissuade. This technique may appear to bring repetition
of the same themes or stories in diﬀerent suras but, as the Qur an is
above all a book of guidance, each sura adds to the fuller picture and
to the eﬀectiveness of the guidance. For instance, in the midst of
discussion about divorce and settlements, it suspends the introduction of regulations and instructs the believers to keep up prayer and
stand in obedience to God (2: 237–8), later to resume discussion of
the divorce regulations. While urging people to give in charity, before
the day comes when there will be no trade and no help from friends
or intercessors, it shifts to the Throne verse (2: 255) to describe the
glory of God and refer to the time when no one can intercede for
anyone else. Afterwards, having reminded people of God’s power, it
resumes its injunctions to give in charity. In a religion that seeks to
aﬀect people’s beliefs and behaviour in all aspects of life it is never
suﬃcient to say something once or twice, and if the material on God,
on earlier prophets, or on the Day of Judgement were each dealt with
only once, the eﬀect would not be so all-pervasive. This technique
compresses many aspects of the Qur anic message into any one
sura, each forming self-contained lessons. This is particularly useful
as it is rare for anyone to read the whole Qur an at once: it is mainly
used in short sections during worship and preaching, as well as by
individuals or on television and radio in daily readings.
A central feature of Qur anic style is contrast: between this world

xx

Introduction

and the next (each occurring exactly 115 times), between believers
and disbelievers, between Paradise and Hell. This has been studied
in great detail, and scholars have found truly remarkable patterns of
contrasts: angels and devils, life and death, secrecy and openness,
and so on, occurring exactly the same number of times.13 This sense
of balance in the text is continued in passages where the Prophet is
instructed to say, ‘Now the truth has come from your Lord: let those
who wish to believe in it do so, and let those who wish to reject it do
so’ (18: 29) and ‘There is no compulsion in religion: true guidance
has become distinct from error’ (2: 256) (one of the names the Qur an
gives for itself is al-Furqan––the book that distinguishes [right from
wrong] (25: 1)).
One stylistic feature that makes the Qur an particularly eﬀective is
that God speaks directly to people (e.g. 56: 57–73) and to the
Prophet, often using ‘We’, the ﬁrst person plural of majesty, to
represent Himself. It involves the readers/listeners by questioning,
directing, and urging them, alternating this with information (e.g.
56: 47–74). The Qur an is also full of dialogue between God and His
prophets (e.g. Abraham in 2: 260; Noah in 11: 45–8), between
prophets and their audiences (e.g. Salih and the Thamud people in
11: 61–5), and between diﬀerent individuals (e.g. Solomon and the
hoopoe, Solomon and his chieftains, and the Queen of Sheba talking
to her advisers, all in 27: 19–44).
One of the obvious stylistic features of the Qur an is the use of
grammatical shifts from one personal pronoun to another (e.g. third
to second to ﬁrst person speaker; from singular to plural of majesty),
and in the tenses of verbs. This is an accepted rhetorical practice in
Arabic, similar to features used in some European literature. It is
called in Arabic iltifat (i.e. ‘turning’ from one thing to another). One
example (4: 114) is changing from talking about God, in the third
person, to God Himself speaking in the ﬁrst person plural of
majesty: ‘There is no good in most of their secret talk, only in
commanding charity, or good, or reconciliation between people. To
anyone who does these things, seeking to please God, We shall give a
rich reward.’ Instead of saying ‘He will give him . . .’, God speaks in
the plural of majesty to give His personal guarantee of reward.14
A. Nawfal, al-I jaz al- Adadi lil-Qur an il-Karim (Cairo, 1976).
M. Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an: Themes and Style (London: I.B.
Tauris, 2001), 187–208.
13
14

Introduction

xxi

The Qur an always oﬀers justiﬁcation for its message, supporting
it with logical argument, for example in explaining the unity of God
(e.g. 21: 21–2; 23: 91; 36: 78–83). The Qur an supports its statements
with reference to the past (the history of earlier nations and
prophets), to the present (to nature as a manifestation of God’s
wisdom, power, and care), and to the future (life in the Hereafter and
Judgement), in addition of course to reminding people constantly of
God and His attributes.
Another feature of the Qur an is that it does not name individuals,
with a few rare exceptions such as prophets and angels, but consistently uses techniques of generalization. One method of achieving
this is the use of general words like ‘those who’ or ‘whoever’, giving
the message universal application. Thus, in permitting Muslims to
defend themselves, it gives permission generally to ‘those who have
been driven unjustly from their homes . . .’ (22: 40 ﬀ.). This will
apply at any time or place. When it urges the Prophet to deliver the
message, even when dealing with his own personal situation and
feelings, instead of saying ‘You should deliver the message and fear
none but God’, it speaks of ‘those who deliver God’s messages and
fear only Him and no other: God’s reckoning is enough’ (33: 39).
Reformers, preachers, and anyone standing for the truth can apply
this readily to themselves, because such statements are put in a proverbial style. Verses of the Qur an are therefore readily quoted and
inscribed on plaques which can be hung on the walls of oﬃces,
houses, courtrooms, and so on as an inspiration or a reminder.

Issues of Interpretation
Over the years, a large body of commentaries on the Qur an has
accumulated, and diﬀerences in interpretation can be observed both
between the various traditions within Islam (such as Sunni, Shi i, or
Suﬁ),15 and between diﬀerent periods in history. It is not the intention here to go into detail (see the Bibliography to this volume for
useful works for further reading), but some illustrative examples
may give the reader some understanding of the complexity and
sophistication of views that arise from reading the Qur an.
15 For a deﬁnition of these terms see I. R. Netton, A Popular Dictionary of Islam
(London: Curzon Press, 1992).

xxii

Introduction

An important feature of the Qur anic style is that it alludes to
events without giving their historical background. Those who
heard the Qur an at the time of its revelation were fully aware of the
circumstances. Later generations of Muslims had to rely on the body
of literature explaining the circumstances of the revelations (asbab
al-nuzul),16 and on explanations and commentaries based on the
written and oral records of statements by eyewitnesses. These oral
testimonies were collected and later written down.
Interpretation is further complicated by the highly concise style
of the Qur an. A verse may contain several sentences in short, proverbial style, with pronominal references relating them to a wider
context. Moreover, proverbial statements can be lifted from the text
and used on their own, isolated from their context and unguided by
other references in the Qur an that might provide further explanation. Both non-Muslims eager to criticize Islam and some Islamic
extremists have historically used this technique to justify their
views.
Some examples will illustrate this feature, for instance the verse
‘Slay them wherever you ﬁnd them’ (2: 191),17 thus translated by
Dawood and taken out of context, has been interpreted to mean that
Muslims may kill non-Muslims wherever they ﬁnd them. In fact the
only situations where the Qur an allows Muslims to ﬁght are in selfdefence and to defend the oppressed who call for help (4: 75), but
even in the latter case this is restricted to those with whom the
Muslims do not have treaty obligations (8: 72). The pronoun ‘them’
here refers to the words ‘those who attack you’ at the beginning of
the previous verse. Thus the Prophet and his followers are here
being allowed to ﬁght the Meccans who attack them. The Qur an
makes many general statements but it is abundantly clear from the
grammar and the context of this statement that this is not one of
them.
‘Wherever you ﬁnd them’ or ‘come up against them’ is similarly
misunderstood. As exegetes and commentators explain, the Muslims
16 The asbab al-nuzul are found in Qur an commentaries. They identify the circumstances of the revelations and refer to names and details of what actually happened.
17 N. J. Dawood’s translation, The Koran, Penguin Classics (Harmondsworth, 1990).
This has been used as the title of an article, ‘ “Slay them wherever you ﬁnd them”:
Humanitarian Law in Islam’, by James J. Busuttil of Linacre College, Oxford, in Revue
de droit pénal militaire et de droit de la guerre (1991), 113–40.

Introduction

xxiii

were anxious that if their enemies attacked them in Mecca, which
was and is a sanctuary (in which no Muslim is allowed to ﬁght, or kill
even an animal or plant), and they retaliated and killed, they would
be breaking the law. The Qur an simply reassured the Muslims that
they could defend themselves when attacked, even if they killed their
attackers, whether within the sanctuary or outside it. However, the
six verses that concern war (2: 190–5) contain many restrictions and
are couched in restraining language that appeals strongly to the
Muslims’ conscience. In six verses we ﬁnd four prohibitions; seven
restrictions (one ‘until’, four ‘if ’, two ‘who ﬁght you’); as well as such
cautions as ‘in God’s cause’, ‘be mindful of God’, ‘God does not love
those who overstep the limits’, ‘He is with those who are mindful of
Him’, loves ‘those who do good’, and ‘God is most forgiving and
merciful’. The prevalent message of the Qur an is one of peace and
tolerance 18 but it allows self-defence.
Equally misinterpreted and taken out of context is what has
become labelled as ‘the sword verse’ (9: 5) although the word ‘sword’
does not appear in the Qur an: ‘When the [four] forbidden months
are over, wherever you ﬁnd the polytheists, kill them, seize them,
besiege them, ambush them’. The hostility and ‘bitter enmity’ of the
polytheists and their ﬁtna (persecution: 2: 193; 8: 39) of the Muslims
during the time of the Prophet became so great that the disbelievers
were determined to convert the Muslims back to paganism or ﬁnish
them oﬀ: ‘They will not stop ﬁghting you [believers] until they make
you revoke your faith, if they can’ (2: 217). It was these hardened
polytheists in Arabia, who would accept nothing other than the
expulsion of the Muslims or their reversion to paganism, and who
repeatedly broke their treaties, that the Muslims were ordered to
treat in the same way––either to expel them or to accept nothing
from them except Islam. But, even then, the Prophet and the
Muslims were not simply to pounce on such enemies, reciprocating
by breaking the treaty themselves: an ultimatum was issued, giving
the enemy notice that, after the four sacred months mentioned in
9: 5 above, the Muslims would wage war on them.
Yet the main clause of the sentence––‘kill the polytheists’––is
singled out by some non-Muslims as representing the Islamic
attitude to war; even some Muslims take this view and allege that
18

See Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an.

xxiv

Introduction

this verse abrogated many other verses, including ‘There is no
compulsion in religion’ (2: 256) and even, according to one solitary
extremist, ‘God is forgiving and merciful’. This far-fetched interpretation isolates and decontextualizes a small part of a sentence
and of a passage, 9: 1–15, which gives many reasons for the order
to ﬁght such polytheists: they continually broke their agreements
and aided others against the Muslims, they started hostilities
against the Muslims, barred others from becoming Muslims,
expelled them from the Holy Mosque and even from their own
homes. At least eight times the passage mentions the misdeeds of
these people against the Muslims. Moreover, consistent with
restrictions on war elsewhere in the Qur an, the immediate context
of this ‘sword verse’ exempts such polytheists as do not break their
agreements and who keep the peace with the Muslims (9: 7); it
orders that those enemies seeking safe conduct should be protected
and delivered to the place of safety they seek (9: 6). The whole of this
context to verse 5, with all its restrictions, is ignored by those who
simply isolate one part of a sentence to build on it their theory of
war and violence in Islam.
One further cause for misinterpretation is the lack of awareness of
the diﬀerent meanings of a given term in diﬀerent contexts (see
below, ‘This Translation: Identifying Aspects of Meaning’). Thus,
for example, in Dawood’s translation: ‘He that chooses a religion
other than Islam, it will not be accepted of him and in the world to
come, he will be one of the lost’ (3: 85),19 it has to be borne in mind
that the word islam in the Arabic of the Qur an means complete
devotion/submission to God, unmixed with worship of any other.
All earlier prophets are thus described by the Qur an as muslim.
Those who read this word islam in the sense of the religion of the
Prophet Muhammad will set up a barrier, illegitimately based on this
verse, between Islam and other monotheistic religions. The Qur an
clearly deﬁnes its relationship with earlier scriptures by saying:
‘He has sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with the Truth, conﬁrming what went before: He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
earlier as a guide for people’ (3: 3–4). Indeed it urges the Christians
and the Jews to practise their religion (5: 68, 45, 47). They are given
the honoriﬁc title of ‘People of the Book’, and the Qur an appeals to
19

The Koran, translated by N. J. Dawood, Penguin Classics.

Introduction

xxv

what is common between them: ‘Say, “People of the Book, let us
arrive at a statement that is common to us all: we worship God alone,
we ascribe no partner to Him, and none of us takes others beside
God as lords” ’ (3: 64).
The Qur an forbids arguing with the People of the Book except in
the best way and urges the Muslims to say: ‘We believe in what was
revealed to us and in what was revealed to you; our God and your
God are one [and the same]’ (29: 46). God addresses Muslims, Jews,
and Christians with the following: ‘We have assigned a law and a path
to each of you. If God had so willed, He would have made you one
community, but He wanted to test you through that which He has
given you, so race to do good: you will all return to God and He will
make clear to you the matters you diﬀered about’ (5: 48). The Qur an
allows Muslims to eat the food of the People of the Book and marry
their women (5: 5). These are explicit statements which Muslims
involved in interfaith dialogue rely upon.
Misinterpretation is also observed with regard to the status of
women. For example, 2: 228 ‘husbands have a degree [of right] over
them [their wives]’ has been variously interpreted by Muslims and
non-Muslims to relegate women in general to a lower status, when in
fact this cannot be based on this verse. The reference here is not to
‘women’ and ‘men’ but to ‘wives’ and ‘husbands’. The context is in
questions of divorce, between wives and husbands. Partly based
on a misinterpretation of this verse, for example, most traditional
scholars came to the view that Muslim women could not be judges,
whereas Abu Hanifa (d. ah 150/767 ce), the founder of one of
the four main schools of Islamic law, and modern jurists in many
Muslim countries (although not all) do also allow women to be
judges.
A further example of discrimination against women due to disregard of context is found in the way some scholars interpreted
2: 282. In urging the recording of a debt in writing, the Qur an says:
‘Call in two men as witnesses. If two men are not there, then call one
man and two women out of those you approve as witnesses, so that
if one of the two women should forget the other can remind her.’20
The majority view was to generalize this to all testimony and all
20 Many translate tadilla as ‘err’, not realizing that one of the many meanings (wujuh)
of the verb is ‘forget’.

THE QUR  AN

This page intentionally left blank

1. THE OPENING
This sura is seen to be a precise table of contents of the Qur anic message. It is
very important in Islamic worship, being an obligatory part of the daily
prayer, repeated several times during the day.

1 In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, a the Giver b of Mercy! c
2 Praise belongs to God, Lord d of the Worlds, e 3 the Lord of Mercy,
the Giver of Mercy, 4 Master of the Day of Judgement. 5 It is You we
worship; it is You we ask for help. 6 Guide us to the straight path:
7 the path of those You have blessed, those who incur no anger f and
who have not gone astray.
a Most occurrences of this term rahman in the Qur an are in the context of Him being
mighty and majestic as well as merciful. The addition of the word ‘Lord’ here is
intended to convey this aspect of the term.
b This term rahim is an intensive form suggesting that the quality of giving mercy is
inherent in God’s nature.
c This is the only instance where this formula, present at the start of every sura but
one, is counted as the ﬁrst numbered verse.
d The Arabic root r–b–b has connotations of caring and nurturing in addition to
lordship, and this should be borne in mind wherever the term occurs and is rendered
‘lord’.
e Al- alamin in Arabic means all the worlds, of mankind, angels, animals, plants, this
world, the next, and so forth.
f Note that the verb here is not attributed to God.

2. THE COW
This is a Medinan sura and the longest in the Qur an, containing material
revealed over several years, and named after the story of the cow which the
Israelites were ordered to slaughter (verses 67 ﬀ.). The sura opens with a
response to the plea for guidance in Sura 1, ‘The Opening’, dividing mankind
into three groups in their response to this guidance––the believers, the disbelievers, and the hypocrites––and closes conﬁrming the tenets of faith given in
the opening verses (3–5). The addressee shifts as the sura progresses: at various
times the text addresses mankind in general (verses 21 ﬀ.), where they are urged
to serve God who has been so gracious to them (they are reminded that God
created Adam and favoured him over the angels), the Children of Israel
(verses 40 ﬀ.), who are reminded of God’s special favours to them and urged to
believe in scriptures that do indeed conﬁrm their own, and the believers (verses
136 ﬀ.), who are given instruction in many areas––prayer, fasting, pilgrimage,
defence, marital law, and ﬁnancial matters.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim a
2 This is the Scripture in which there is no doubt, b containing guidance for those who are mindful c of God, 3 who believe in the unseen, d
a These are the names of the three Arabic letters a, l, and m. Twenty-nine suras of
the Qur an begin with separate alphabetical letters like these, from one individual letter
up to ﬁve. Various interpretations have been oﬀered. It is suﬃcient to mention two here:
(1) these letters indicated to the Arabs who ﬁrst heard the Qur an that the Qur an
consists of letters and words of their own language, although it was superior to any
speech of their own, being of divine origin; (2) they are an exclamatory device intended
to arrest the listeners’ attention, similar to the custom of starting poems with an
emphatic ‘No!’ or ‘Indeed!’ Exegetes normally added, after expounding their theories,
‘God knows best.’
b The Arabic construction la rayba ﬁhi carries more than one meaning, including
‘there is nothing dubious about/in it’ and ‘it is not to be doubted’ as regards its origin or
contents.
c The root w–q–y in this morphological form has the meaning of being mindful or
being wary of something. The opposite of being mindful of God is to ignore Him or
have no reference to Him in your thought, feeling, or action. This is a fundamental
concept about God and the believers’ relation to Him. Many translators render the term
as ‘those who fear God’, but this is an over-expression of the term and does not
correctly convey the meaning of the concept, which is a very common one in the Qur an.
d What is beyond their perception, literally ‘absent’–
–this applies to the nature of
God, the Hereafter, historical information not witnessed, etc.

2: 20

The Cow

5

keep up the prayer, a and give b out of what We have provided for
them; 4 those who believe in the revelation sent down to you
[Muhammad], and in what was sent before you, those who have
ﬁrm faith in the Hereafter. 5 Such people are following their Lord’s
guidance and it is they who will prosper. 6 As for those who disbelieve, it makes no diﬀerence whether you warn them or not: they
will not believe. 7 God has sealed their hearts and their ears, and their
eyes are covered. They will have great torment. c
8 Some people say, ‘We believe in God and the Last Day,’ when
really they do not believe. 9 They seek to deceive God and the
believers but they only deceive themselves, though they do not realize it. 10 There is a disease in their hearts, to which God has added
more: agonizing torment awaits them for their persistent lying.
11 When it is said to them, ‘Do not cause corruption in the land,’ they
say, ‘We are only putting things right,’ 12 but really they are causing
corruption, though they do not realize it. 13 When it is said to them,
‘Believe, as the others believe,’ they say, ‘Should we believe as the
fools do?’ but they are the fools, though they do not know it. 14 When
they meet the believers, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they are
alone with their evil ones, they say, ‘We’re really with you; we were
only mocking.’ 15 God is mocking them, and allowing them more
slack to wander blindly in their insolence. 16 They have bought error
in exchange for guidance, so their trade reaps no proﬁt, and they are
not rightly guided. 17 They are like people who [labour to] kindle a
ﬁre: when it lights up everything around them, God takes away all
their light, leaving them in utter darkness, unable to see–– 18 deaf,
dumb, and blind: they will never return. 19 Or [like people who,
under] a cloudburst from the sky, with its darkness, thunder, and
lightning, put their ﬁngers into their ears to keep out the thunderclaps for fear of death–– God surrounds the disbelievers. 20 The
lightning almost snatches away their sight: whenever it ﬂashes on
a This means regular and proper performance of the formal prayer (salah), as taught
by the Prophet Muhammad.
b Yunﬁquna in the Arabic of the Qur an literally means ‘spend’, on others, in good
causes, in the way of God.
c The basic meaning of  adhab is ‘to restrain (from doing wrong)’, extended to mean
anything diﬃcult or painful, punishment, famine (see 23: 78). See Majaz al-Qur an, by
 Izz al-Din Ibn  Abdul-Salam (London: Al-Furqan Foundation, 1999), 194, and E. W.
Lane, Arabic–English Lexicon (Beirut: Librairie du Liban, 1968).

6

The Qur an

2: 21

them they walk on and when darkness falls around them they stand
still. If God so willed, He could take away their hearing and sight:
God has power over everything.
21 People, worship your Lord, who created you and those before
you, so that you may be mindful [of Him] 22 who spread out the earth
for you and built the sky; who sent water down from it and with that
water produced things for your sustenance. Do not, knowing this, set
up rivals to God. 23 If you have doubts about the revelation We have
sent down to Our servant, then produce a single sura like it–– enlist
whatever supporters a you have other than God–– if you truly [think
you can]. 24 If you cannot do this–– and you never will–– then beware
of the Fire prepared for the disbelievers, whose fuel is men and
stones.
25 [Prophet], give those who believe and do good the news that
they will have Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams. Whenever
they are given sustenance from the fruits of these Gardens, they will
say, ‘We have been given this before,’ because they were provided
with something like it. b They will have pure spouses and there they
will stay.
26 God does not shy from drawing comparisons even with something as small as a gnat, or larger: c the believers know it is the truth
from their Lord, but the disbelievers say, ‘What does God mean by
such a comparison?’ Through it He makes many go astray and leads
many to the right path. But it is only the rebels He makes go astray:
27 those who break their covenant with God after it has been conﬁrmed, who sever the bonds that God has commanded to be joined,
who spread corruption on the earth–– these are the losers. 28 How can
you ignore God when you were lifeless and He gave you life, when
He will cause you to die, then resurrect you to be returned to Him?
29 It was He who created all that is on the earth for you, then turned
to the sky and made the seven heavens; it is He who has knowledge
of all things.
a Literally ‘whatever witnesses’. Razi interprets this as referring either to their idols
or to their leaders.
b One interpretation is that they enjoy each meal so much that they are delighted to
see favourite dishes again; another interpretation is that the food of Paradise resembles
the delicacies of this world in appearance.
c Comparisons such as those given here were seen by some as inappropriate for God,
and this is an answer to these critics.

2: 41

The Cow

7

30 [Prophet], when your Lord told the angels, ‘I am putting a successor a on earth,’ they said, ‘How can b You put someone there who
will cause damage and bloodshed, when we celebrate Your praise and
proclaim Your holiness?’ but He said, ‘I know things you do not.’
31 He taught Adam all the names [of things], then He showed them to
the angels and said, ‘Tell me the names of these if you truly [think
you can].’ 32 They said, ‘May You be gloriﬁed! We have knowledge
only of what You have taught us. You are the All Knowing and All
Wise.’ 33 Then He said, ‘Adam, tell them the names of these.’ When
he told them their names, God said, ‘Did I not tell you that I know
what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and that I know what
you reveal and what you conceal?’
34 When We told the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all
bowed. But not Iblis, who refused and was arrogant: he was one of
the disobedient. 35 We said, ‘Adam, live with your wife in this garden.
Both of you eat freely there as you will, but do not go near this tree,
or you will both become wrongdoers.’ 36 But Satan made them slip,
and removed them from the state they were in. We said, ‘Get out, all
of you! You are each other’s enemy. c On earth you will have a place
to stay and livelihood for a time.’ 37 Then Adam received some
words d from his Lord and He accepted his repentance: He is the
Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful. 38 We said, ‘Get out, all of
you! But when guidance comes from Me, as it certainly will, there
will be no fear for those who follow My guidance nor will they
grieve–– 39 those who disbelieve and deny Our messages shall be the
inhabitants of the Fire, and there they will remain.’
40 Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you. Honour your
pledge to Me and I will honour My pledge to you: I am the One you
should fear. 41 Believe in the message I have sent down conﬁrming
what you already possess. Do not be the ﬁrst to disbelieve in it, and
a The term khalifa is normally translated as ‘vicegerent’ or ‘deputy’. While this is
one meaning of the term, its basic meaning is ‘successor’–– the Qur an often talks
about generations and individuals who are successors to each other, cf. 6: 165,
7: 129, etc.–– or a ‘trustee’ to whom a responsibility is temporarily given, cf. Moses and
Aaron, 7: 142.
b This is istifham inkari in Arabic, i.e. not an interrogative but an exclamatory
statement normally expressing disapproval, best rendered in English by ‘How can you’.
There are numerous examples of this in the Qur an.
c Iblis is the enemy of mankind and vice versa. Iblis is also known as Shaytan/Satan.
d Words teaching Adam how to repent, see 7: 23.

8

The Qur an

2: 42

do not sell My messages for a small price: I am the One of whom you
should be mindful. 42 Do not mix truth with falsehood, or hide the
truth when you know it. 43 Keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed
alms, and bow your heads [in worship] with those who bow theirs.
44 How can you tell people to do what is right and forget to do it
yourselves, even though you recite the Scripture? Have you no
sense? 45 Seek help with steadfastness and prayer–– though this is
hard indeed for anyone but the humble, 46 who know a that they will
meet their Lord and that it is to Him they will return.
47 Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured
you over other people. 48 Guard yourselves against a Day when no
soul will stand in place of another, no intercession will be accepted
for it, nor any ransom; nor will they be helped. 49 Remember when
We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who subjected you to terrible
torment, slaughtering your sons and sparing only your women––
this was a great trial from your Lord–– 50 and when We parted the
sea for you, so saving you and drowning Pharaoh’s people right
before your eyes. 51 We appointed forty nights for Moses [on Mount
Sinai] and then, while he was away, you took to worshipping the
calf–– a terrible wrong. 52 Even then We forgave you, so that you
might be thankful.
53 Remember when We gave Moses the Scripture, and the means
to distinguish [right and wrong], so that you might be guided.
54 Moses said to his people, ‘My people, you have wronged yourselves
by worshipping the calf, so repent to your Maker and kill [the guilty
among] you. That is the best you can do in the eyes of your Maker.’
He accepted your repentance: He is the Ever Relenting and the Most
Merciful. 55 Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we will not believe
you until we see God face to face.’ At that, thunderbolts struck you
as you looked on. 56 Then We revived you after your death, so that
you might be thankful. 57 We made the clouds cover you with shade,
and sent manna and quails down to you, saying, ‘Eat the good things
We have provided for you.’ It was not Us they wronged; they
wronged themselves.
58 Remember when We said, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there
as you will, but enter its gate humbly and say, “Relieve us!” Then We
a One of the classical meanings of zanna is ‘to know’ rather than the predominant
modern sense of ‘to think’. This term is used in the sense of knowledge several times in
the Qur an.

2: 68

The Cow

9

shall forgive you your sins and increase the rewards of those who do
good.’ 59 But the wrongdoers substituted a diﬀerent word from the
one they had been given. So, because they persistently disobeyed,
We sent a plague down from the heavens upon the wrongdoers.
60 Remember when Moses prayed for water for his people and We
said to him, ‘Strike the rock with your staﬀ.’ Twelve springs gushed
out, and each group knew its drinking place. ‘Eat and drink the
sustenance God has provided and do not cause corruption in the
land.’ 61 Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we cannot bear to eat only
one kind of food, so pray to your Lord to bring out for us some of the
earth’s produce, its herbs and cucumbers, its garlic, lentils, and
onions.’ He said, ‘Would you exchange better for worse? Go to
Egypt and there you will ﬁnd what you have asked for.’ They were
struck with humiliation and wretchedness, and they incurred the
wrath of God because they persistently rejected His messages and
killed prophets contrary to all that is right. All this was because they
disobeyed and were lawbreakers.
62 The [Muslim] believers, the Jews, the Christians, and the
Sabians a – all those who believe in God and the Last Day and do
good–– will have their rewards with their Lord. No fear for them, nor
will they grieve. 63 Remember when We took your pledge, and made
the mountain tower high above you, and said, ‘Hold fast to what We
have given you and bear its contents in mind, so that you may be
conscious of God.’ 64 Even after that you turned away. Had it not
been for God’s favour and mercy on you, you would certainly have
been lost. 65 You know about those of you who broke the Sabbath,
and so We said to them, ‘Be like apes! b Be outcasts!’ 23 We made this
an example to those people who were there at the time and to those
who came after them, and a lesson to all who are mindful of God.
67 Remember when Moses said to his people, ‘God commands you
to sacriﬁce a cow.’ They said, ‘Are you making fun of us?’ He
answered, ‘God forbid that I should be so ignorant.’ 68 They said,
‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us what sort of cow it should be.’
He answered, ‘God says it should be neither too old nor too young,
a The Sabians were a monotheistic religious community. See M. Asad, The Message
of the Qur an (Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus, 1997), 40 n. 49.
b This is understood by some as ‘physically turn into apes’ but in fact it is a ﬁgure of
speech–– the structure ‘be apes’ is like ‘be stones/iron’ in 17: 50. Just as the Qur an
describes the disbelievers as blind, deaf, and dumb, here the transgressors are apes.

10

The Qur an

2: 69

but in between, so do as you are commanded.’ 69 They said, ‘Call on
your Lord for us, to show us what colour it should be.’ He answered,
‘God says it should be a bright yellow cow, pleasing to the eye.’
70 They said, ‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us [exactly] what it
is: all cows are more or less alike to us. With God’s will, we shall be
guided.’ 71 He replied, ‘It is a perfect and unblemished cow, not
trained to till the earth or water the ﬁelds.’ They said, ‘Now you have
brought the truth,’ and so they slaughtered it, though they almost
failed to do so. 72 Then, when you [Israelites] killed someone and
started to blame one another–– although God was to bring what you
had concealed to light–– 73 We said, ‘Strike the [body] with a part of
[the cow]’: thus God brings the dead to life and shows His signs so
that you may understand. 74 Even after that, your hearts became as
hard as rocks, or even harder, for there are rocks from which streams
spring out, and some from which water comes when they split
open, and others which fall down in awe of God: He is not unaware
of what you do.
75 So can you [believers] hope that such people will believe you,
when some of them used to hear the words of God and then deliberately twist them, even when they understood them? 76 When they
meet the believers, they say, ‘We too believe.’ But when they are
alone with each other they say, ‘How could you tell them about
God’s revelation [to us]? They will be able to use it to argue against
you before your Lord! Have you no sense?’ 77 Do they not know that
God is well aware of what they conceal and what they reveal? 78 Some
of them are uneducated, and know the Scripture only through wishful thinking. They rely on guesswork. 79 So woe to those who write
something down with their own hands and then claim, ‘This is from
God,’ in order to make some small gain. Woe to them for what their
hands have written! Woe to them for all that they have earned!
80 They say, ‘The Fire will only touch us for a few days.’ Say to them,
‘Have you received a promise from God–– for God never breaks His
promise–– or are you saying things about Him of which you have no
real knowledge?’ 81 Truly those who do evil and are surrounded by
their sins will be the inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain, 82 while
those who believe and do good deeds will be the inhabitants of the
Garden, there to remain.
83 Remember when We took a pledge from the Children of Israel:
‘Worship none but God; be good to your parents and kinsfolk, to

2: 91

The Cow

11

orphans and the poor; speak good words to all people; keep up the
prayer and pay the prescribed alms.’ Then all but a few of you
turned away and paid no heed. 84 We took a pledge from you, ‘Do not
shed one another’s blood or drive one another from your homelands.’
You acknowledged it at the time, and you can testify to this. 85 Yet
here you are, killing one another and driving some of your own
people from their homes, helping one another in sin and aggression
against them. If they come to you as captives, you still pay to set
them free, although you had no right to drive them out. a So do you
believe in some parts of the Scripture and not in others? The punishment for those of you who do this will be nothing but disgrace in
this life, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be condemned to
the harshest torment: God is not unaware of what you do. 86 These
are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the
Hereafter: their torment will not be lightened, nor will they be
helped.
87 We gave Moses the Scripture and We sent messengers after
him in succession. We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and
strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. So how is it that, whenever
a messenger brings you something you do not like, you become
arrogant, calling some impostors and killing others? 88 They say, ‘Our
hearts are impenetrably wrapped [against whatever you say],’ but
God has rejected b them for their disbelief: they have little faith.
89 When a Scripture came to them from God conﬁrming what they
already had, and when they had been praying for victory against the
disbelievers, even when there came to them something they knew [to
be true], they disbelieved in it: God rejects those who disbelieve.
90 Low indeed is the price for which they have sold their souls by
denying the God-sent truth, out of envy that God should send His
bounty to any of His servants He pleases. The disbelievers have
ended up with wrath upon wrath, and a humiliating torment awaits
them. 91 When it is said to them, ‘Believe in God’s revelations,’ they
reply, ‘We believe in what was revealed to us,’ but they do not believe
in what came afterwards, though it is the truth conﬁrming what they
a Razi: although the Jews fought each other in alliance with diﬀerent Arab tribes,
when their side captured a Jew from another side, they would pay to have them released,
as they said this was required by the Torah.
b La ana in Arabic dictionaries gives the meaning of tarada ‘to reject’, ‘to drive away’
rather than ‘to curse’.

12

The Qur an

2: 92

already have. Say [Muhammad], ‘Why did you kill God’s prophets
in the past if you were true believers? 92 Moses brought you clear
signs, but then, while he was away, you chose to worship the calf––
you did wrong.’
93 Remember when We took your pledge, making the mountain
tower above you, and said, ‘Hold on ﬁrmly to what We have given
you, and listen to [what We say].’ They said, ‘We hear and we disobey,’ and through their disbelief they were made to drink [the love
of] the calf deep into their hearts. 94 Say, ‘How evil are the things
your belief commands you to do, if you really are believers!’ Say, ‘If
the last home with God is to be for you alone and no one else, then
you should long for death, if your claim is true.’ 95 But they will
never long for death, because of what they have stored up with their
own hands: God is fully aware of the evildoers. 96 [Prophet], you are
sure to ﬁnd them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people,
even the polytheists. Any of them would wish to be given a life of a
thousand years, though even such a long life would not save them
from the torment: God sees everything they do.
97 Say [Prophet], ‘If anyone is an enemy of Gabriel–– who by
God’s leave brought down the Qur an to your heart conﬁrming previous scriptures as a guide and good news for the faithful–– 98 if
anyone is an enemy of God, His angels and His messengers, of
Gabriel and Michael, then God is certainly the enemy of such disbelievers.’ 99 For We have sent down clear messages to you and only
those who defy [God] would refuse to believe them. 100 How is it that
whenever they make a covenant or a pledge, some of them throw it
away? In fact, most of them do not believe.
101 When God sent them a messenger conﬁrming the Scriptures
they already had, some of those who had received the Scripture
before threw the Book of God over their shoulders as if they had no
knowledge, 102 and followed what the evil ones had fabricated about
the Kingdom of Solomon instead. Not that Solomon himself was a
disbeliever; it was the evil ones who were disbelievers. They taught
people witchcraft and what was revealed in Babylon to the two
angels Harut and Marut. Yet these two never taught anyone without
ﬁrst warning him, ‘We are sent only to tempt–– do not disbelieve.’
From these two, they learned what can cause discord between man
and wife, although they harm no one with it except by God’s leave.
They learned what harmed them, not what beneﬁted them, knowing

2: 113

The Cow

13

full well that whoever gained [this knowledge] would lose any share
in the Hereafter. Evil indeed is the [price] for which they sold their
souls, if only they knew. 103 If they had believed and been mindful
of God, their reward from Him would have been far better, if only
they knew.
104 Believers, do not say [to the Prophet], ‘Ra ina,’ but say,
‘Unzurna,’ a and listen [to him]: an agonizing torment awaits those
who ignore [God’s words]. 105 Neither those People of the Book who
disbelieve nor the idolaters would like anything good to be sent down
to you from your Lord, but God chooses for His grace whoever He
will: His bounty has no limits. 106 Any revelation We cause to be
superseded or forgotten, We replace with something better or similar. Do you [Prophet] not know that God has power over everything?
107 Do you not know that control of the heavens and the earth belongs
to Him? You [believers] have no protector or helper but God. 108 Do
you wish to demand of your messenger something similar to what
was demanded of Moses? b Whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has
strayed far from the right path. 109 Even after the truth has become
clear to them, many of the People of the Book wish they could turn
you back to disbelief after you have believed, out of their selﬁsh envy.
Forgive and forbear until God gives his command: He has power
over all things. 110 Keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms.
Whatever good you store up for yourselves, you will ﬁnd it with
God: He sees everything you do.
111 They also say, ‘No one will enter Paradise unless he is a Jew or a
Christian.’ This is their own wishful thinking. [Prophet], say, ‘Produce your evidence, if you are telling the truth.’ 112 In fact, any who
direct themselves c wholly to God and do good will have their reward
with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 113 The Jews
say, ‘The Christians have no ground whatsoever to stand on,’ and
the Christians say, ‘The Jews have no ground whatsoever to stand
on,’ though they both read the Scripture, and those who have no
a The word ra ina can be used politely as an expression for ‘look at us’. However, a
group of Jews in Medina hostile to Muhammad subtly changed its pronunciation to
imply ‘you are foolish’ or ‘you herd our sheep’ in order to abuse the Prophet. So the
believers are advised to avoid the word and use unzurna, also meaning ‘look at us’,
instead. See 4: 46.
b See 2: 55 and 4: 153.
c Literally ‘their faces’. One meaning of wajh (face) is ‘direction’ and the basic
meaning of aslama is ‘devote’. See note to 2: 128.

14

The Qur an

2: 114

knowledge say the same; God will judge between them on the Day of
Resurrection concerning their diﬀerences.
114 Who could be more wicked than those who prohibit the
mention of God’s name in His places of worship a and strive to have
them deserted? Such people should not enter them without fear:
there is disgrace for them in this world and painful punishment
in the Hereafter. 115 The East and the West belong to God: wherever
you turn, there is His Face. b God is all pervading and all knowing.
116 They c have asserted, ‘God has a child.’ May He be exalted! No!
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him, everything
devoutly obeys His will. 117 He is the Originator of the heavens and
the earth, and when He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it
is. 118 Those who have no knowledge also say, ‘If only God would
speak to us!’ or ‘If only a miraculous sign would come to us!’
People before them said the same things: their hearts are all alike. We
have made Our signs clear enough to those who have solid faith.
119 We have sent you [Prophet] with the truth, bearing good news and
warning. You will not be responsible for the inhabitants of the Blaze.
120 The Jews and the Christians will never be pleased with you unless
you follow their ways. Say, ‘God’s guidance is the only true guidance.’ If you were to follow their desires after the knowledge that has
come to you, you would ﬁnd no one to protect you from God or help
you. 121 Those to whom We have given the Scripture, who follow it as
it deserves, d are the ones who truly believe in it. Those who deny its
truth will be the losers.
122 Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured
you over other people, 123 and beware of a Day when no soul can
stand in for another. No compensation will be accepted from it,
nor intercession be of use to it, nor will anyone be helped. 124 When
Abraham’s Lord tested him with certain commandments, which
he fulﬁlled, He said, ‘I will make you a leader of people.’ Abraham
asked, ‘And will You make leaders from my descendants too?’ God
answered, ‘My pledge does not hold for those who do evil.’
a Razi suggests that this probably alludes to the Jews’ objections to the change of
qibla (direction of prayer) from Jerusalem to Mecca and their eﬀorts to stop people
praying towards Mecca in the Prophet’s mosque in Medina (see 2: 115 and 142).
b Or ‘His direction’.
c Razi suggests that this refers to the pagan Arabs (see 16: 57) and (some of ) the
Christians and Jews (see 9: 30).
d This can also mean ‘who read it as it ought to be read’.

2: 135

The Cow

15

125 We made the House a a resort and a sanctuary for people,
saying, ‘Take the spot where Abraham stood as your place of
prayer.’ We commanded Abraham and Ishmael: ‘Purify My House
for those who walk round it, those who stay there, and those who
bow and prostrate themselves in worship.’ 126 Abraham said, ‘My
Lord, make this land secure and provide with produce those of
its people who believe in God and the Last Day.’ God said, ‘As
for those who disbelieve, I will grant them enjoyment for a short
while and then subject them to the torment of the Fire–– an evil
destination.’
127 As Abraham and Ishmael built up the foundations of the House
[they prayed], ‘Our Lord, accept [this] from us. You are the All
Hearing, the All Knowing. 128 Our Lord, make us devoted b to You;
make our descendants into a community devoted to You. Show us
how to worship and accept our repentance, for You are the Ever
Relenting, the Most Merciful. 129 Our Lord, make a messenger of
their own rise up from among them, to recite Your revelations to
them, teach them the Scripture and wisdom, and purify them: You
are the Mighty, the Wise.’
130 Who but a fool would forsake the religion of Abraham? We have
chosen him in this world and he will rank among the righteous in
the Hereafter. 131 His Lord said to him, ‘Devote yourself to Me.’
Abraham replied, ‘I devote myself to the Lord of the Universe,’
132 and commanded his sons to do the same, as did Jacob: ‘My sons,
God has chosen [your] religion for you, so make sure you devote
yourselves to Him, to your dying moment.’
133 Were you [Jews] there to see when death came upon Jacob?
When he said to his sons, ‘What will you worship after I am gone?’
they replied, ‘We shall worship your God and the God of your
fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, one single God: we devote
ourselves to Him.’ c 134 That community passed away. What they
earned belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you: you will
not be answerable for their deeds.
135 They say, ‘Become Jews or Christians, and you will be rightly
a

The Ka ba at Mecca.
Aslama here means to devote oneself to the one God alone, so that Abraham will
come to his Lord with his heart totally devoted to Him: 3: 64; 26: 89; 37: 84.
c ‘One single God’ reinforces the interpretation of islam as ‘devotion’, one meaning
of aslama (al-Mu jam al-Wasit ).
b

16

The Qur an

2: 136

guided.’ Say [Prophet], ‘No, [ours is] the religion of Abraham, the
upright, who did not worship any god besides God.’ 136 So [you
believers], say, ‘We believe in God and in what was sent down to us
and what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the
Tribes, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and all the prophets by
their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and we
devote ourselves to Him.’ 137 So if they believe like you do, they will
be rightly guided. But if they turn their backs, then they will be
entrenched in opposition. God will protect you from them: He is the
All Hearing, the All Knowing. And say [believers], 138 ‘[Our life]
takes its colour from God, and who gives a better colour than God?
It is Him we worship.’
139 Say [Prophet] [to the Jews and Christians], ‘How can you argue
with us about God when He is our Lord and your Lord? Our deeds
belong to us, and yours to you. We devote ourselves entirely to Him.
140 Or are you saying that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the
Tribes were Jews or Christians?’ [Prophet], ask them, ‘Who knows
better: you or God? Who could be more wicked than those who hide
a testimony [they received] from God? God is not unmindful of
what you do.’ 141 That community passed away: what they earned
belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you. You will not be
answerable for their deeds.
142 The foolish people will say, ‘What has turned them away from
the prayer direction they used to face?’ a Say, ‘East and West belong
to God. He guides whoever He will to the right way.’ 143 We have
made you [believers] into a just community, b so that you may bear
witness [to the truth] before others and so that the Messenger may
bear witness [to it] before you. We only made the direction the one
you used to face [Prophet] in order to distinguish those who follow
the Messenger from those who turn on their heels: that test was
hard, except for those God has guided. God would never let your
faith go to waste [believers], c for God is most compassionate and
most merciful towards people. 144 Many a time We have seen you
[Prophet] turn your face towards Heaven, so We are turning you
a This refers to the change in the Muslims’ prayer direction from Jerusalem to
Mecca in the second year of the Hijra.
b Literally ‘a middle nation’.
c This reassured those who asked whether the prayers said towards Jerusalem had
been wasted.

2: 155

The Cow

17

towards a prayer direction that pleases you. a Turn your face in the
direction of the Sacred Mosque: wherever you [believers] may be,
turn your faces to it. Those who were given the Scripture know with
certainty that this is the Truth from their Lord: God is not unaware
of what they do. 145 Yet even if you brought every proof to those who
were given the Scripture, they would not follow your prayer direction, nor will you follow theirs, nor indeed will any of them follow
one another’s direction. If you [Prophet] were to follow their desires,
after the knowledge brought to you, you would be doing wrong.
146 Those We gave Scripture know it as well as they know their own
sons, but some of them hide the truth that they know. 147 The truth is
from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt. 148 Each
community has its own direction to which it turns: race to do good
deeds and wherever you are, God will bring you together. b God has
power to do everything.
149 [Prophet], wherever you may have started out, turn your face in
the direction of the Sacred Mosque–– this is the truth from your
Lord: He is not unaware of what you do–– 150 wherever you may have
started out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque;
wherever any of you may be, turn your faces towards it, so that
people may have no argument against you c – except for the wrongdoers among them: do not fear them; fear Me–– and so that I may
perfect My favour on you and you may be guided, 151 just as We d
have sent among you a Messenger of your own to recite Our revelations to you, purify you and teach you the Scripture, wisdom,
and [other] things you did not know. 152 So remember Me; I will
remember you. Be thankful to Me, and never ungrateful.
153 You who believe, seek help through steadfastness and prayer,
for God is with the steadfast. 154 Do not say that those who are killed
in God’s cause are dead; they are alive, though you do not realize it.
155 We shall certainly test you with fear and hunger, and loss of
a The Prophet secretly hoped to be allowed to face the Mosque in Mecca in prayer, as
it was so dear to him, being built by Abraham and Ishmael, as seen from verse 127
onwards.
b On the Day of Judgement, cf. 5: 48.
c Both Jews and polytheists questioned the choice of qibla (prayer direction) for their
own reasons.
d Note the shift in pronoun from singular to plural of majesty (see Introduction,
p. xx).

18

The Qur an

2: 156

property, lives, and crops. But [Prophet], give good news to those
who are steadfast, 156 those who say, when aﬄicted with a calamity,
‘We belong to God and to Him we shall return.’ 157 These will be
given blessings and mercy from their Lord, and it is they who are
rightly guided.
158 Safa and Marwa a are among the rites of God, so for those who
make major or minor b pilgrimage to the House c it is no oﬀence to
circulate between the two. d Anyone who does good of his own accord
will be rewarded, for God rewards good deeds, and knows everything. 159 As for those who hide the proofs and guidance We send
down, after We have made them clear to people in the Scripture,
God rejects them, and so do others, 160 unless they repent, make
amends, and declare the truth. I will certainly accept their repentance: I am the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful. 161 As for those
who disbelieve and die as disbelievers, God rejects them, as do the
angels and all people. 162 They will remain in this state of rejection:
their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be reprieved.
163 Your God is the one God: there is no god except Him, the Lord
of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy. 164 In the creation of the heavens and
earth; in the alternation of night and day; in the ships that sail the
seas with goods for people; in the water which God sends down from
the sky to give life to the earth when it has been barren, scattering all
kinds of creatures over it; in the changing of the winds and clouds
that run their appointed courses between the sky and earth: there are
signs in all these for those who use their minds. 165 Even so, there are
some who choose to worship others besides God as rivals to Him,
loving them with the love due to God, but the believers have greater
love for God. If only the idolaters could see–– as they will see
when they face the torment–– that all power belongs to God, and
that God punishes severely. 166 When those who have been followed
disown their followers, when they all see the suﬀering, when all
a Two hills adjacent to the Ka ba between which a pilgrim and visitor should walk up
and down in commemoration of what Hagar did in search of water for her baby,
Ishmael.
b The minor pilgrimage ( umra) can be done during the pilgrimage season or at any
other time during the year.
c The Ka ba, which is central both to the direction of prayer and to the rites of
pilgrimage as established by Abraham at God’s command.
d The Muslims were reluctant to perform this rite, as the polytheists had installed
two idols on these hills. Here it is reclaimed for God.

2: 177

The Cow

19

bonds between them are severed, 167 the followers will say, ‘If only we
had one last chance, we would disown them as they now disown us.’
In this way, God will make them see their deeds as a source of bitter
regret: they shall not leave the Fire.
168 People, eat what is good and lawful from the earth, and do not
follow Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn enemy. 169 He always
commands you to do what is evil and indecent, and to say things
about God that you do not really know. a 170 But when it is said to
them, ‘Follow the message that God has sent down,’ they answer,
‘We follow the ways of our fathers.’ What! Even though their fathers
understood nothing and were not guided? 171 Calling to disbelievers b
is like a herdsman calling to things that hear nothing but a shout and
a cry: they are deaf, dumb, and blind, and they understand nothing.
172 You who believe, eat the good things We have provided for you
and be grateful to God, if it is Him that you worship. 173 He has only
forbidden you carrion, blood, pig’s meat, and animals over which any
name other than God’s has been invoked. But if anyone is forced to
eat such things by hunger, rather than desire or excess, he commits
no sin: God is most merciful and forgiving.
174 As for those who conceal the Scripture that God sent down and
sell it for a small price, they only ﬁll their bellies with Fire. God will
not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify
them: an agonizing torment awaits them. 175 These are the ones who
exchange guidance for error, and forgiveness for torment. What can
make them patient in the face of the Fire? 176 This is because God has
sent the Scripture with the Truth; those who pursue diﬀerences in
the Scripture are deeply entrenched in opposition.
177 Goodness does not consist in turning your face towards East or
West. The truly good are those who believe in God and the Last Day,
in the angels, the Scripture, and the prophets; who give away some
of their wealth, however much they cherish it, to their relatives, to
orphans, the needy, travellers and beggars, and to liberate those in
bondage; those who keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms;
who keep pledges whenever they make them; who are steadfast in
misfortune, adversity, and times of danger. These are the ones who
are true, and it is they who are aware of God.
See 6: 138, 145.
It is also possible to interpret this as referring to the disbelievers calling on their
idols, who cannot respond.
a
b

20

The Qur an

2: 178

178 You who believe, fair retribution a is prescribed for you in cases
of murder: the free man for the free man, the slave for the slave, the
female for the female. b But if the culprit is pardoned by his
aggrieved brother, this shall be adhered to fairly, and the culprit shall
pay what is due in a good way. This is an alleviation from your Lord
and an act of mercy. If anyone then exceeds these limits, grievous
suﬀering awaits him. 179 Fair retribution saves life for you, people of
understanding, so that you may guard yourselves against what is
wrong.
When death approaches one of you who leaves wealth, 180 it is
prescribed that he should make a proper bequest to parents and close
relatives–– a duty incumbent on those who are mindful of God. 181 If
anyone alters the bequest after hearing it, the guilt of the alteration
will fall on them: God is all hearing and all knowing. 182 But if anyone
knows c that the testator has made a mistake, or done wrong, and so
puts things right between the parties, he will incur no sin: God is
most forgiving and merciful.
183 You who believe, fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed for those before you, so that you may be mindful of God.
184 Fast for a speciﬁc number of days, but if one of you is ill, or on a
journey, on other days later. For those who can fast only with extreme
diﬃculty, there is a way to compensate–– feed a needy person. But if
anyone does good of his own accord, it is better for him, and fasting is
better for you, if only you knew. 185 It was in the month of Ramadan
that the Qur an was revealed as guidance for mankind, clear messages
giving guidance and distinguishing between right and wrong. So any
one of you who is present that month should fast, and anyone who is
ill or on a journey should make up for the lost days by fasting on other
days later. God wants ease for you, not hardship. He wants you to
complete the prescribed period and to glorify Him for having guided
you, so that you may be thankful. 186 [Prophet], if My servants ask you
about Me, I am near. I respond to those who call Me, so let them
respond to Me, and believe in Me, so that they may be guided.
a

qisas etymologically means ‘to track down’.
Before Islam, the Arabs did not observe equality in retribution, but a stronger tribe
would demand more, e.g. a man for a woman, a free man for a slave, or several men for
one man, likewise for ﬁnancial compensation. The intention of this verse is to insist on
equality.
c One meaning of khafa is ‘to know’ (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).
b

2: 193

The Cow

21

187 You [believers] are permitted to lie with your wives during the
night of the fast: they are [close] as garments to you, as you are to
them. God was aware that you were betraying yourselves, a so He
turned to you in mercy and pardoned you: now you can lie with
them–– seek what God has ordained for you–– eat and drink until the
white thread of dawn becomes distinct from the black. Then fast
until nightfall. Do not lie with them during the nights of your
devotional retreat in the mosques: these are the bounds set by God,
so do not go near them. In this way God makes His messages clear
to people, that they may guard themselves against doing wrong.
188 Do not consume your property wrongfully, nor use it to bribe
judges, intending sinfully and knowingly to consume parts of other
people’s property.
189 They ask you [Prophet] about crescent moons. Say, ‘They show
the times appointed for people, and for the pilgrimage.’ Goodness
does not consist of entering houses by the back [door]; b the truly
good person is the one who is mindful of God. So enter your houses
by their [main] doors and be mindful of God so that you may
prosper. 190 Fight in God’s cause against those who ﬁght you, but do
not overstep the limits: c God does not love those who overstep the
limits. 191 Kill them wherever you encounter them, d and drive them
out from where they drove you out, for persecution is more serious
than killing. e Do not ﬁght them at the Sacred Mosque unless they
ﬁght you there. If they do ﬁght you, kill them–– this is what such
disbelievers deserve–– 192 but if they stop, then God is most forgiving
and merciful. 193 Fight them until there is no more persecution, and
a Some Muslims admitted to the Prophet that they had spoiled their fast by having
sexual relations during the nights of Ramadan.
b It was the custom of some Arabs on returning from the pilgrimage to enter their
houses by the back door, considering this to be an act of piety.
c The Arabic command la ta tadu is so general that commentators have agreed that it
includes prohibition of starting hostilities, ﬁghting non-combatants, disproportionate
response to aggression, etc.
d The Muslims were concerned as to whether it was permitted to retaliate when
attacked within the sacred precincts in Mecca when on pilgrimage (see 2: 196 and Razi’s
Tafsir). They are here given permission to ﬁght back wherever they encounter their
attackers, in the precinct or outside it.
e ‘Persecuting you unlawfully is worse than you killing them in the precincts in selfdefence.’ The article al- in Arabic sometimes takes the place of a pronoun, as here ‘their
persecution’ and ‘your killing them’ (Tammam Hassan, al-Bayan, Cairo, 1993, 118–45);
it is not the generic al-, cf. 2: 217. See also 2: 217.

22

The Qur an

2: 194

worship a b is devoted to God. If they cease hostilities, there can
be no [further] hostility, except towards aggressors. 194 A sacred
month for a sacred month: violation of sanctity [calls for] fair retribution. So if anyone commits aggression against you, attack him as
he attacked you, but be mindful of God, and know that He is with
those who are mindful of Him. 195 Spend in God’s cause: do not
contribute to your destruction with your own hands, c but do good,
for God loves those who do good.
196 Complete the pilgrimages, major and minor, for the sake of
God. If you are prevented [from doing so], then [send] whatever
oﬀering for sacriﬁce you can aﬀord, and do not shave your heads d
until the oﬀering has reached the place of sacriﬁce. If any of you is
ill, or has an ailment of the scalp, he should compensate by fasting,
or feeding the poor, or oﬀering sacriﬁce. When you are in safety,
anyone wishing to take a break e between the minor pilgrimage and
the major one must make whatever oﬀering he can aﬀord. If he
lacks the means, he should fast for three days during the pilgrimage, and seven days on his return, making ten days in all. This
applies to those whose household is not near the Sacred Mosque.
Always be mindful of God, and be aware that He is stern in His
retribution.
197 The pilgrimage takes place during the prescribed months.
There should be no indecent speech, misbehaviour, or quarrelling
for anyone undertaking the pilgrimage–– whatever good you do, God
is well aware of it. Provide well for yourselves: the best provision
is to be mindful of God–– always be mindful of Me, you who have
understanding–– 198 but it is no oﬀence to seek some bounty from
your Lord. f When you surge down from Arafat remember God at
the sacred place. g Remember Him: He has guided you. Before that
a

Worship at the sacred mosque.
Cf. 8: 39 and note e to 2: 191 above.
c If they are not prepared to pay for what it takes to defend themselves, then they will
bring ruin on themselves. The verse is also understood generally to outlaw suicide and
other forms of self-harm.
d Shaving the head or cutting the hair is one of the rites performed by male pilgrims
after most of the other rites have been completed.
e This means breaking the restrictions of ihram (consecration) termed tamattu .
f It is lawful to trade while on pilgrimage.
g This is one of the sites of the pilgrimage between Arafat and Mina–
– a plain called
Muzdalifa.
b

2: 212

The Cow

23

you were astray. 199 Surge down where the rest of the people do, a and
ask forgiveness of God: He is most forgiving and merciful. 200 When
you have completed your rites, remember God as much as you
remember your own fathers, or even more. There are some who pray,
‘Our Lord, give us good in this world,’ and they will have no share in
the Hereafter; 201 others pray, ‘Our Lord, give us good in this world
and in the Hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.’
202 They will have the share they have worked for: God is swift in
reckoning.
203 Remember God on the appointed days. b If anyone is in a hurry
to leave after two days, there is no blame on him, nor is there any
blame on anyone who stays on, so long as they are mindful of God.
Be mindful of God, and remember that you will be gathered to Him.
204 There is [a kind of] man whose views on the life of this world may
please you [Prophet], he even calls on God to witness what is in his
heart, yet he is the bitterest of opponents. 205 When he leaves, he sets
out to spread corruption in the land, destroying crops and livestock–– God does not like corruption. 206 When he is told, ‘Beware of
God,’ his arrogance leads him to sin. Hell is enough for him: a
dreadful resting place. 207 But there is also a kind of man who gives
his life away to please God, and God is most compassionate to His
servants. 208 You who believe, enter wholeheartedly into submission
to God c and do not follow in Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn
enemy. 209 If you slip back after clear proof has come to you, then be
aware that God is almighty and wise.
210 Are these people waiting for God to come to them in the
shadows of the clouds, together with the angels? But the matter
would already have been decided by then: d all matters are brought
back to God. 211 [Prophet], ask the Children of Israel how many clear
signs We brought them. If anyone alters God’s blessings after he has
received them, God is stern in punishment. 212 The life of this world
is made to seem glamorous to the disbelievers, and they laugh at
those who believe. But those who are mindful of God will be above

a

Some arrogant tribes used to take a diﬀerent route from the masses.
These come after the day of sacriﬁce, when two or three days are spent in Mina to
perform the rite of stoning the Devil.
c Silm, which also means ‘peace’.
d It will be too late for them to repent.
b

24

The Qur an

2: 213

them on the Day of Resurrection: God provides immeasurably for
whoever He pleases. 213 Mankind was a single community, then God
sent prophets to bring good news and warning, and with them He
sent the Scripture with the Truth, to judge between people in their
disagreements. It was only those to whom it was given who disagreed
about it after clear signs had come to them, because of rivalry
between them. So by His leave God guided the believers to the truth
they had diﬀered about: God guides whoever He will to a straight
path.
214 Do you suppose that you will enter the Garden without ﬁrst
having suﬀered like those before you? They were aﬄicted by misfortune and hardship, and they were so shaken that even [their]
messenger and the believers with him cried, ‘When will God’s help
arrive?’ Truly, God’s help is near. 215 They ask you [Prophet] what
they should give. Say, ‘Whatever you give should be for parents,
close relatives, orphans, the needy, and travellers. God is well aware
of whatever good you do.
216 Fighting is ordained for you, though you dislike it. You may
dislike something although it is good for you, or like something
although it is bad for you: God knows and you do not.’ 217 They ask
you [Prophet] about ﬁghting in the prohibited month. Say, ‘Fighting
in that month is a great oﬀence, but to bar others from God’s path,
to disbelieve in Him, prevent access to the Sacred Mosque, and expel
its people, are still greater oﬀences in God’s eyes: persecution is
worse than killing.’ a They will not stop ﬁghting you [believers] until
they make you revoke your faith, if they can. If any of you revoke
your faith and die as disbelievers, your deeds will come to nothing in
this world and the Hereafter, and you will be inhabitants of the Fire,
there to remain. 218 But those who have believed, migrated, and
striven for God’s cause, it is they who can look forward to God’s
mercy: God is most forgiving and merciful.
219 They ask you [Prophet] about intoxicants and gambling: say,
‘There is great sin in both, and some beneﬁt for people: the sin is
greater than the beneﬁt.’ They ask you what they should give: say,
‘Give what you can spare.’ In this way, God makes His messages
clear to you, so that you may reﬂect 220 on this world and the next.
a To persecute people for believing in God is a worse oﬀence than for the aggrieved
party to ﬁght back in the prohibited month. This further explains verse 191.

2: 228

The Cow

25

They ask you about [the property of] orphans: say, ‘It is good to set
things right for them. If you combine their aﬀairs with yours,
remember they are your brothers and sisters: God knows those who
spoil things and those who improve them. Had He so willed, He
could have made you vulnerable too: He is almighty and wise.’
221 Do not marry idolatresses until they believe: a believing slave
woman is certainly better than an idolatress, even though she may
please you. And do not give your women in marriage to idolaters
until they believe: a believing slave is certainly better than an idolater, even though he may please you. Such people call [you] to the
Fire, while God calls [you] to the Garden and forgiveness by His
leave. He makes His messages clear to people, so that they may bear
them in mind.
222 They ask you [Prophet] about menstruation. Say, ‘Menstruation is a painful condition, so keep away from women during it. Do
not approach them until they are cleansed; when they are cleansed,
you may approach them as God has ordained. a God loves those who
turn to Him, and He loves those who keep themselves clean. 223 Your
wives are your ﬁelds, so go into your ﬁelds whichever way you like, b
and send [something good] ahead for yourselves. Be mindful of God:
remember that you will meet Him.’ [Prophet], give good news to the
believers.
224 [Believers], do not allow your oaths in God’s name to hinder you
from doing good, being mindful of God and making peace between
people. God hears and knows everything: 225 He will not call you to
account for oaths you have uttered unintentionally, but He will call
you to account for what you mean in your hearts. God is most
forgiving and forbearing. 226 For those who swear that they will not
approach their wives, there shall be a waiting period of four months: c
if they go back, remember God will be most forgiving and merciful,
227 but if they are determined to divorce, remember that God hears
and knows all. 228 Divorced women must wait for three monthly
periods before remarrying, and, if they really believe in God and the
a The Arabic expressions used here are clear euphemisms for ‘do not have sexual
intercourse with them’.
b When the Muslims emigrated to Medina, they heard from the Jews that a child
born from a woman approached from behind would have a squint.
c Before Islam, husbands could make such an oath and suspend the wife indeﬁnitely. In Islam, if they do not go back after four months, divorce becomes eﬀective.

26

The Qur an

2: 229

Last Day, it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in
their wombs: their husbands would do better to take them back
during this period, provided they wish to put things right. Wives
have [rights] similar to their [obligations], according to what is
recognized to be fair, and husbands have a degree [of right] over
them: [both should remember that] God is almighty and wise.
229 Divorce can happen twice, and [each time] wives either be kept
on in an acceptable manner or released in a good way. It is not lawful
for you to take back anything that you have given [your wives], except
where both fear that they cannot maintain [the marriage] within the
bounds set by God: if you [arbiters] suspect that the couple may not
be able to do this, then there will be no blame on either of them if the
woman opts to give something for her release. a These are the bounds
set by God: do not overstep them. It is those who overstep God’s
bounds who are doing wrong. 230 If a husband re-divorces his wife
after the second divorce, she will not be lawful for him until she has
taken another husband; if that one divorces her, there will be no
blame if she and the ﬁrst husband return to one another, provided
they feel that they can keep within the bounds set by God. These are
God’s bounds, which He makes clear for those who know.
231 When you divorce women and they have reached their set time,
then either keep or release them in a fair manner. Do not hold on to
them with intent to harm them and commit aggression: anyone who
does this wrongs himself. Do not make a mockery of God’s revelations; remember the favour He blessed you with, and the Scripture
and wisdom He sent to teach you. Be mindful of God and know that
He has full knowledge of everything. 232 When you divorce women
and they have reached their set time, do not prevent them from
remarrying their husbands if they both agree to do so in a fair
manner. b Let those of you who believe in God and the Last Day take
this to heart: that is more wholesome and purer for you. God knows
and you do not.
233 Mothers suckle their children for two whole years, if they wish
to complete the term, and clothing and maintenance must be borne
by the father in a fair manner. No one should be burdened with more
than they can bear: no mother shall be made to suﬀer harm on
a

By paying back all or part of the dowry in return for divorce.
Sometimes a woman’s father or brother would interfere to stop her reconciling with
her husband. Here the Qur an condemns such interference.
b

2: 240

The Cow

27

account of her child, nor any father on account of his. The same
duty is incumbent on the father’s heir. a If, by mutual consent and
consultation, the couple wish to wean [the child], they will not be
blamed, nor will there be any blame if you wish to engage a wet
nurse, provided you pay as agreed in a fair manner. Be mindful of
God, knowing that He sees everything you do.
234 If any of you die and leave widows, the widows should wait for
four months and ten nights before remarrying. When they have
completed this set time, you will not be blamed for anything they
may reasonably choose to do with themselves. God is fully aware of
what you do. 235 You will not be blamed whether you give a hint that
you wish to marry these women, or keep it to yourselves–– God
knows that you intend to propose b to them. Do not make a secret
arrangement with them; speak to them honourably and do not conﬁrm the marriage tie until the prescribed period reaches its end.
Remember that God knows what is in your souls, so be mindful of
Him. Remember that God is most forgiving and forbearing.
236 You will not be blamed if you divorce women when you have
not yet consummated the marriage or ﬁxed a bride-gift for them, but
make fair provision for them, the rich according to his means and the
poor according to his–– this is a duty for those who do good. 237 If you
divorce wives before consummating the marriage but after ﬁxing a
bride-gift for them, then give them half of what you had previously
ﬁxed, unless they waive [their right], or unless the one who holds the
marriage tie waives [his right]. Waiving [your right] is nearer to
godliness, so do not forget to be generous towards one another: God
sees what you do. 238 Take care to do your prayers, c praying in the
best way, d and stand before God in devotion. 239 If you are in danger,
pray when you are out walking or riding; when you are safe again,
remember God, for He has taught you what you did not know.
240 If any of you die and leave widows, make a bequest for them: a
year’s maintenance and no expulsion from their homes [for that
time]. But if they leave of their own accord, you will not be blamed
for what they may reasonably choose to do with themselves: God is
a

If he dies.
Dhakara in classical Arabic meant ‘to propose’.
c To secure that the parties in such a bitter situation will abide by the Qur an’s
teaching they are instructed to pray and stand before God.
d Another interpretation is ‘including the middle prayer’, with various opinions as to
which prayer is meant.
b

28

The Qur an

2: 241

almighty and wise. 241 Divorced women shall also have such maintenance as is considered fair: this is a duty for those who are mindful of
God. 242 In this way God makes His revelations clear to you, so that
you may grow in understanding.
243 [Prophet], consider those people who abandoned their homeland in fear of death, a even though there were thousands of them.
God said to them, ‘Die!’ and then brought them back to life again;
God shows real favour to people, but most of them are ungrateful.
244 Fight b in God’s cause and remember that He is all hearing and all
knowing. 245 Who will give God a good loan, which He will increase
for him many times over? It is God who withholds and God who
gives abundantly, and it is to Him that you will return.
246 [Prophet], consider the leaders of the Children of Israel who
came after Moses, when they said to one of their prophets, ‘Set up a
king for us and we shall ﬁght in God’s cause.’ He said, ‘But could it
be that you would not ﬁght, if it were ordained for you?’ They said,
‘How could we not ﬁght in God’s cause when we and our children
have been driven out of our homeland?’ Yet when they were commanded to ﬁght, all but a few of them turned away: God has full
knowledge of those who do wrong. 247 Their prophet said to them,
‘God has now appointed Talut c to be your king,’ but they said, ‘How
can he be king over us when we have a greater right to rule than he?
He does not even have great wealth.’ He said, ‘God has chosen him
over you, and has given him great knowledge and stature. God
grants His authority to whoever He pleases: God is magnanimous,
all knowing.’ 248 Their prophet said to them, ‘The sign of his authority will be that the Ark [of the Covenant] will come to you. In it there
will be [the gift of] tranquillity from your Lord and relics of the
followers of Moses and Aaron, carried by the angels. There is a sign
in this for you if you believe.’
249 When Talut set out with his forces, he said to them, ‘God will
test you with a river. Anyone who drinks from it will not belong with
me, but anyone who refrains from tasting it will belong with me; if
he scoops up just one handful [he will be excused].’ But they all
drank [deep] from it, except for a few. When he crossed it with those
See verse 246 below.
After dealing with marital issues, the Qur an returns to the question of retaliation.
c The Arabic name for Saul.
a
b

2: 257

The Cow

29

who had kept faith, they a said, ‘We have no strength today against
Goliath and his warriors.’ But those who knew that they were going
to meet their Lord said, ‘How often a small force has defeated a large
army with God’s permission! God is with those who are steadfast.’
250 And when they met Goliath and his warriors, they said, ‘Our
Lord, pour patience on us, make us stand ﬁrm, and help us against
the disbelievers,’ 251 and so with God’s permission they defeated
them. David killed Goliath, and God gave him sovereignty and wisdom and taught him what He pleased. If God did not drive some
back by means of others the earth would be completely corrupt, but
God is bountiful to all.
252 These are the revelations of God which We recite to you
[Muhammad] with the truth, and you truly are one of the messengers. 253 We favoured some of these messengers above others. God
spoke to some; others He raised in rank; We gave Jesus, son of Mary,
Our clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit. If God
had so willed, their successors would not have fought each other
after they had been brought clear signs. But they disagreed: some
believed and some disbelieved. If God had so willed, they would not
have fought each other, but God does what He will.
254 You who believe, give from what We have provided for you,
before the Day comes when there is no bargaining, no friendship,
and no intercession. It is the disbelievers who are wrong. 255 God:
there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful. b
Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. All that is in the heavens
and in the earth belongs to Him. Who is there that can intercede
with Him except by His leave? He knows what is before them and
what is behind them, but they do not comprehend any of His
knowledge except what He wills. His throne extends over the
heavens and the earth; it does not weary Him to preserve them both.
He is the Most High, the Tremendous.
256 There is no compulsion in religion: true guidance has become
distinct from error, so whoever rejects false gods and believes in God
has grasped the ﬁrmest hand-hold, one that will never break. God is
all hearing and all knowing. 257 God is the ally of those who believe:
He brings them out of the depths of darkness and into the light. As
a
b

Those who had drunk the water or some of the few who went with Talut.
Cf. 13: 33.

30

The Qur an

2: 258

for the disbelievers, their allies are false gods who take them from the
light into the depths of darkness, they are the inhabitants of the Fire,
and there they will remain.
258 [Prophet], have you not thought about the man who disputed
with Abraham about his Lord, because God had given him power to
rule? When Abraham said, ‘It is my Lord who gives life and death,’
he said, ‘I too give life and death.’ So Abraham said, ‘God brings the
sun from the east; so bring it from the west.’ The disbeliever was
dumbfounded: God does not guide those who do evil.
259 Or take the one who passed by a ruined town. He said, ‘How
will God give this life when it has died?’ So God made him die for a
hundred years, and then raised him up, saying, ‘How long did you
stay like that?’ He answered, ‘A day, or part of a day.’ God said, ‘No,
you stayed like that for a hundred years. Look at your food and
drink: they have not gone bad. Look at your donkey–– We will make
you a sign for the people–– look at the bones: see how We bring them
together and clothe them with ﬂesh!’ When all became clear to him,
he said, ‘Now I know that God has power over everything.’
260 And when Abraham said, ‘My Lord, show me how You give life
to the dead,’ He said, ‘Do you not believe, then?’ ‘Yes,’ said Abraham,
‘but just to put my heart at rest.’ So God said, ‘Take four birds and
train them to come back to you. Then place them on separate hilltops, a call them back, and they will come ﬂying to you: know that
God is all powerful and wise.’
261 Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause are like grains of
corn that produce seven ears, each bearing a hundred grains. God
gives multiple increase to whoever He wishes: He is limitless and all
knowing. 262 Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause, and do not
follow their spending with reminders of their benevolence or hurtful
words, will have their rewards with their Lord: no fear for them, nor
will they grieve. 263 A kind word and forgiveness is better than a
charitable deed followed by hurtful [words]: God is self-suﬃcient,
forbearing. 264 You who believe, do not cancel out your charitable
a Most of the classical commentators take the view that Abraham must have had to
cut up the birds ﬁrst if they were really to rise from the dead, rendering this phrase ‘then
place them separately on hilltops’. However, Abu Muslim thought the important part
of the image was that it is as easy for souls to come back to the body as for the birds to
come back to Abraham (Razi). Cf. ‘To Him you shall return’, in many places, e.g. 2: 245
and 285.

2: 275

The Cow

31

deeds with reminders and hurtful words, like someone who spends
his wealth only to be seen by people, not believing in God and the
Last Day. Such a person is like a rock with earth on it: heavy rain
falls and leaves it completely bare. Such people get no rewards for
their works: God does not guide the disbelievers. 265 But those who
spend their wealth in order to gain God’s approval, and as an aﬃrmation of their own faith, are like a garden on a hill: heavy rain falls
and it produces double its normal yield; even if no heavy rain falls, it
will still be watered by the dew. God sees all that you do. 266 Would
any of you like to have a garden of palm trees and vines, graced with
ﬂowing streams and all kinds of produce, which, when you are
aﬄicted with old age and feeble oﬀspring, is struck by a ﬁery whirlwind and burnt down? In this way God makes His messages clear to
you, so that you may reﬂect on them.
267 You who believe, give charitably from the good things you have
acquired and that We have produced for you from the earth. Do not
give away the bad things that you yourself would only accept with
your eyes closed: remember that God is self-suﬃcient, worthy of all
praise. 268 Satan threatens you with the prospect of poverty and
commands you to do foul deeds; God promises you His forgiveness
and His abundance: God is limitless and all knowing, 269 and He gives
wisdom to whoever He will. Whoever is given wisdom has truly been
given much good, but only those with insight bear this in mind.
270 Whatever you may give, or vow to give, God knows it well, and
those who do wrong will have no one to help them. 271 If you give
charity openly, it is good, but if you keep it secret and give to the
needy in private, that is better for you, and it will atone for some of
your bad deeds: God is well aware of all that you do. 272 It is not for
you [Prophet] to guide them; it is God who guides whoever He will.
Whatever charity you give beneﬁts your own soul, provided you do it
for the sake of God: whatever you give will be repaid to you in full,
and you will not be wronged. 273 [Give] to those needy who are
wholly occupied in God’s way and cannot travel in the land [for
trade]. The unknowing might think them rich because of their selfrestraint, but you will recognize them by their characteristic of not
begging persistently. God is well aware of any good you give.
274 Those who give, out of their own possessions, by night and by
day, in private and in public, will have their reward with their Lord:
no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 275 But those who take usury

32

The Qur an

2: 276

will rise up on the Day of Resurrection like someone tormented by
Satan’s touch. That is because they say, ‘Trade and usury are the
same,’ 276 but God has allowed trade and forbidden usury. Whoever,
on receiving God’s warning, stops taking usury may keep his past
gains–– God will be his judge–– but whoever goes back to usury will
be an inhabitant of the Fire, there to remain. God blights usury, but
blesses charitable deeds with multiple increase: He does not love the
ungrateful sinner. 277 Those who believe, do good deeds, keep up the
prayer, and pay the prescribed alms will have their reward with their
Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 278 You who believe,
beware of God: give up any outstanding dues from usury, if you are
true believers. 279 If you do not, then be warned of war from God and
His Messenger. You shall have your capital if you repent, and without suﬀering loss or causing others to suﬀer loss. 280 If the debtor is
in diﬃculty, then delay things until matters become easier for him;
still, if you were to write it oﬀ as an act of charity, that would be
better for you, if only you knew. 281 Beware of a Day when you will be
returned to God: every soul will be paid in full for what it has
earned, and no one will be wronged.
282 You who believe, when you contract a debt for a stated term,
put it down in writing: have a scribe write it down justly between
you. No scribe should refuse to write: let him write as God has
taught him, let the debtor dictate, and let him fear God, his Lord,
and not diminish [the debt] at all. If the debtor is feeble-minded,
weak, or unable to dictate, then let his guardian dictate justly. Call in
two men as witnesses. If two men are not there, then call one man
and two women out of those you approve as witnesses, so that if one
of the two women should forget a the other can remind her. Let the
witnesses not refuse when they are summoned. Do not disdain to
write the debt down, be it small or large, along with the time it falls
due: this way is more equitable in God’s eyes, more reliable as testimony, and more likely to prevent doubts arising between you. But if
the merchandise is there and you hand it over, there is no blame on
you if you do not write it down. Have witnesses present whenever
you trade with one another, and let no harm be done to either scribe
or witness, for if you did cause them harm, it would be a crime on
your part. Be mindful of God, and He will teach you: He has full
a

A classical meaning of dalla.
˙

2: 286

The Cow

33

knowledge of everything. 283 If you are on a journey, and cannot ﬁnd a
scribe, something should be handed over as security, but if you
decide to trust one another, then let the one who is trusted fulﬁl his
trust; let him be mindful of God, his Lord. Do not conceal evidence:
anyone who does so has a sinful heart, and God is fully aware of
everything you do. 284 Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth
belongs to God and, whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts,
God will call you to account for them. He will forgive whoever He
will and punish whoever He will: He has power over all things.
285 The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him
from his Lord, as do the faithful. They all believe in God, His angels,
His scriptures, and His messengers. ‘We make no distinction
between any of His messengers,’ they say, ‘We hear and obey. Grant
us Your forgiveness, our Lord. To You we all return!’–– 286 God does
not burden any soul with more than it can bear: each gains whatever
good it has done, and suﬀers its bad––‘ Lord, do not take us to task if
we forget or make mistakes. Lord, do not burden us as You burdened
those before us. Lord, do not burden us with more than we have
strength to bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You
are our Protector, so help us against the disbelievers.’

3. THE FAMILY OF  IMRAN
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the family of  Imran mentioned in
verse 33. It begins by emphasizing that the Qur an conﬁrms the earlier scriptures and goes on to say later that the central tenet of faith is devotion to God
(verses 19–20). The story of Zachariah, Mary, and Jesus is given in verses
35–64 and the fact that Jesus was unfathered, just as Adam was created
without a father, is accentuated. Aspects of the battles of Badr and Uhud are
described, especially the latter, where the Muslims disobeyed the Prophet and
were defeated. The sura ﬁrst documents the tension that arose between the
Muslims and certain of the Jews and Christians (verses 65–85 and 98–101),
then closes by emphasizing the unity of faith and conduct between the Muslims
and some of these People of the Book, explaining that these will have their
reward from God (verse 199).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim a
2 God: there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful.
3 Step by step, He has sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with
the Truth, conﬁrming what went before: He sent down the Torah
and the Gospel 4 earlier as a guide for people and He has sent down
the distinction [between right and wrong]. b Those who deny God’s
revelations will suﬀer severe torment: God is almighty and capable
of retribution. 5 Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from God:
6 it is He who shapes you all in the womb as He pleases. There is no
God but Him, the Mighty, the Wise: 7 it is He who has sent this
Scripture down to you [Prophet]. Some of its verses are deﬁnite in
meaning––these are the cornerstone c of the Scripture––and others
are ambiguous. The perverse at heart eagerly pursue the ambiguities
in their attempt to make trouble and to pin down a speciﬁc meaning of their own: only God knows the true meaning. Those ﬁrmly
grounded in knowledge say, ‘We believe in it: it is all from our
Lord’––only those with real perception will take heed–– 8 ‘Our Lord,
See note to 2: 1.
See also 5: 48; 25: 1.
c Literally ‘the mother’.
a
b

3: 20

The Family of  Imran

35

do not let our hearts deviate after You have guided us. Grant us Your
mercy: You are the Ever Giving. 9 Our Lord, You will gather all
people on the Day of which there is no doubt: a God never breaks
His promise.’
10 Neither their possessions nor their children will be any use to
the disbelievers against God. The disbelievers will be fuel for the
Fire, 11 just as Pharaoh’s people and their predecessors denied Our
revelations, and God punished them for their sins: God is severe in
punishing. 12 [Prophet], say to the disbelievers, ‘You will be defeated
and driven together into Hell, a foul resting place. 13 You have already
seen a sign in the two armies that met in battle, one ﬁghting for
God’s cause and the other made up of disbelievers. With their own
eyes [the former] saw [the latter] to be twice their number, b but God
helps whoever He will. There truly is a lesson in this for all with eyes
to see.’
14 The love of desirable things is made alluring for men–– women,
children, gold and silver treasures piled up high, horses with ﬁne
markings, livestock, and farmland–– these may be the joys of this life,
but God has the best place to return to. 15 [Prophet], say, ‘Would you
like me to tell you of things that are better than all of these? Their
Lord will give those who are mindful of God Gardens graced with
ﬂowing streams, where they will stay with pure spouses and God’s
good pleasure–– God is fully aware of His servants–– 16 those who say,
“Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us our sins and protect us from
suﬀering in the Fire,” 17 those who are steadfast, truthful, truly devout,
who give [in God’s cause] and pray before dawn for forgiveness.’
18 God bears witness that there is no god but Him, as do the angels
and those who have knowledge. He upholds justice. There is no
god but Him, the Almighty, the All Wise. 19 True Religion, in God’s
eyes, is islam: [devotion to Him alone]. c Those who were given the
Scripture disagreed out of rivalry, only after they had been given
knowledge–– if anyone denies God’s revelations, God is swift to take
account–– 20 if they argue with you [Prophet], say, ‘I have devoted
myself d to God alone and so have my followers.’ Ask those who were
And on the day itself there will no longer be any doubt (see 102: 3–8).
This is an allusion to the Battle of Badr, where the Muslim army was vastly outnumbered but still victorious (see 8: 43–4).
c See note to 2: 128 above.
d Literally ‘submitted my face’.
a
b

36

The Qur an

3: 21

given the Scripture, as well as those without one, ‘Do you too devote
yourselves to Him alone?’ If they do, they will be guided, but if they
turn away, your only duty is to convey the message. God is aware of
His servants.
21 Give news of agonizing torment to those who ignore God’s
revelations, who unjustiﬁably kill prophets, who kill those who
command that justice is done: 22 the deeds of such people will
come to nothing in this world and in the next and no one will help
them. 23 Have you considered those who were given a share of the
Scripture? When they are asked to accept judgement from God’s
Scripture, some of them turn their backs and walk away, all because
they declare, 24 ‘The Fire will only touch us for a limited number of
days.’ The lies they have invented have led them astray in their own
religion. 25 How will they fare when We gather them together for a
Day of which there is no doubt, when every soul will be paid in full
for what it has done, and they will not be wronged?
26 Say, ‘God, holder of all control, a You give control to whoever
You will and remove it from whoever You will; You elevate whoever
You will and humble whoever You will. All that is good lies in Your
hand: You have power over everything. 27 You merge night into day
and day into night; You bring the living out of the dead and the dead
out of the living; You provide limitlessly for whoever You will.’
28 The believers should not make the disbelievers their allies
rather than other believers–– anyone who does such a thing will
isolate himself completely from God–– except when you need to
protect yourselves from them. God warns you to beware of Him:
the Final Return is to God. 29 Say [Prophet], ‘God knows everything that is in your hearts, whether you conceal or reveal it; He
knows everything in the heavens and earth; God has power over all
things.’ 30 On the Day when every soul ﬁnds all the good it has done
present before it, it will wish all the bad it has done to be far, far
away. God warns you to beware of Him, but God is compassionate
towards His servants. 31 Say, ‘If you love God, follow me, and God
will love you and forgive you your sins; God is most forgiving, most
merciful.’ 32 Say, ‘Obey God and the Messenger,’ but if they turn
away, [know that] God does not love those who ignore [His
commands].
a

Or sovereignty.

3: 45

The Family of  Imran

37

33 God chose Adam, Noah, Abraham’s family, a and the family of
 Imran, over all other people, 34 in one line of descent–– God hears
and knows all. 35  Imran’s wife said, ‘Lord, I have dedicated what is
growing in my womb entirely to You; so accept this from me. You are
the One who hears and knows all,’ 36 but when she gave birth, she
said, ‘My Lord! I have given birth to a girl’–– God knew best what
she had given birth to: the male is not like the female––‘ I name her
Mary and I commend her and her oﬀspring to Your protection from
the rejected Satan.’ 37 Her Lord graciously accepted her and made
her grow in goodness, and entrusted her to the charge of Zachariah.
Whenever Zachariah went in to see her in her sanctuary, he found
her supplied with provisions. He said, ‘Mary, how is it you have
these provisions?’ and she said, ‘They are from God: God provides
limitlessly for whoever He will.’ 38 There and then Zachariah prayed
to his Lord, saying, ‘Lord, from Your grace grant me virtuous oﬀspring: You hear every prayer.’ 39 The angels called out to him, while
he stood praying in the sanctuary, ‘God gives you news of John,
conﬁrming a Word from God. b He will be noble and chaste, a
prophet, one of the righteous.’ 40 He said, ‘My Lord, how can I have a
son when I am so old and my wife is barren?’ [An angel] said, ‘It will
be so: God does whatever He will.’ 41 He said, ‘My Lord, give me a
sign.’ ‘Your sign,’ [the angel] said, ‘is that you will not communicate
with anyone for three days, except by gestures. Remember your Lord
often; celebrate His glory in the evening and at dawn.’
42 The angels said to Mary: ‘Mary, God has chosen you and made
you pure: He has truly chosen you above all women. 43 Mary, be
devout to your Lord, prostrate yourself in worship, bow down with
those who pray.’ 44 This is an account of things beyond your knowledge that We reveal to you [Muhammad]: you were not present
among them when they c cast lots to see which of them should take
charge of Mary, you were not present with them when they argued
[about her].
45 The angels said, ‘Mary, God gives you news of a Word from
Him, whose name will be the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, who will
a

This means family in the widest sense of the term.
Verse 45 below: Jesus was given the epithet ‘a Word from God’. One explanation is that
this was because it was God’s command that brought him into being, rather than the
intervention of a human father (Razi).
c The priests.
b

38

The Qur an

3: 46

be held in honour in this world and the next, who will be one of
those brought near to God. 46 He will speak to people in his infancy a
and in his adulthood. He will be one of the righteous.’ 47 She said,
‘My Lord, how can I have a son when no man has touched me?’
[The angel] said, ‘This is how God creates what He will: when He
has ordained something, He only says, “Be”, and it is. 48 He will
teach him the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel,
49 He will send him as a messenger to the Children of Israel: “I have
come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will make the shape of a
bird for you out of clay, then breathe into it and, with God’s permission, it will become a real bird; I will heal the blind and the leper, and
bring the dead back to life with God’s permission; I will tell you
what you may eat and what you may store up in your houses. b There
truly is a sign for you in this, if you are believers. 50 I have come to
conﬁrm the truth of the Torah which preceded me, and to make
some things lawful to you which used to be forbidden. I have come to
you with a sign from your Lord. Be mindful of God, obey me: 51 God
is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him–– that is a straight path.”’
52 When Jesus realized they [still] did not believe, he said, ‘Who
will help me in God’s cause?’ The disciples said, ‘We will be God’s
helpers; we believe in God–– witness our devotion to Him. 53 Lord,
we believe in what You have revealed and we follow the messenger:
record us among those who bear witness [to the Truth].’ 54 The
[disbelievers] schemed but God also schemed; God is the Best of
Schemers.
55 God said, ‘Jesus, I will take you back and raise you up to Me: I
will purify you of the disbelievers. To the Day of Resurrection I will
make those who follow you superior to those who disbelieved. Then
you will all return to Me and I will judge between you regarding
your diﬀerences. 56 I will make the disbelievers suﬀer severely in this
world and the next; no one will help them.’ 57 God will pay those who
believe and do good deeds their reward in full; God does not love
evildoers.
58 We relate to you [Muhammad] this revelation, a decisive statement.59 In God’s eyes Jesus is just like Adam: He created him from
a Cf. 19: 29–30. The word mahd means a place smoothed out for a small child to
sleep in. It is not a piece of furniture like a cradle.
b Another possible translation is ‘to tell you what you eat and what you store . . .’.

The Family of  Imran

3: 73

39

dust, said to him, ‘Be’, and he was. 60 This is the truth from your
Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt. 61 If anyone disputes this
with you now that you have been given this knowledge, say, ‘Come,
let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women,
ourselves and yourselves, and let us pray earnestly and invoke God’s
rejection on those of us who are lying. 62 This is the truth of the
matter: there is no god but God; God is the Exalted, the Decider.’ a
63 If they turn away, [know that] God is well aware of anyone who
causes corruption. b 64 Say, ‘People of the Book, let us arrive at a
statement that is common to us all: we worship God alone, we
ascribe no partner to Him, and none of us takes others beside God as
lords.’ If they turn away, say, ‘Witness our devotion to Him.’
65 People of the Book, why do you argue about Abraham when the
Torah and the Gospels were not revealed until after his time? Do you
not understand? 66 You argue about some things of which you have
some knowledge, but why do you argue about things of which you
know nothing? God knows and you do not. 67 Abraham was neither a
Jew nor a Christian. He was upright and devoted to God, never an
idolater, 68 and the people who are closest to him are those who truly
follow his ways, this Prophet, and [true] believers–– God is close to
[true] believers.
69 Some of the People of the Book would dearly love to lead you
[believers] astray, but they only lead themselves astray, though they
do not realize it. 70 People of the Book, why do you deny God’s
revelations when you can see they are true? 71 People of the Book,
why do you mix truth with falsehood? Why do you hide the truth
when you recognize it? 72 Some of the People of the Book say, ‘At the
beginning of the day, believe in what has been revealed to these
believers [the Muslims], then at the end of the day reject it, so that
they too may turn back, 73 but do not sincerely believe in anyone
unless he follows your own religion’–– [Prophet], tell them, ‘True
guidance is the guidance of God’–– [they say], ‘Do not believe that
anyone else could be given a revelation similar to what you were
given, or that they could use it to argue against you in your Lord’s
presence.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘All grace is in God’s hands: He
grants it to whoever He will–– He is all embracing, all knowing––
a
b

This translation of the term hakim is suggested by Razi.
Corruption of beliefs and all that follows from that.

40

The Qur an

3: 74

74 and He singles out for His mercy whoever He will. His grace is
inﬁnite.’
75 There are People of the Book who, if you [Prophet] entrust
them with a heap of gold, will return it to you intact, but there are
others of them who, if you entrust them with a single dinar, will not
return it to you unless you keep standing over them, because they
say, ‘We are under no obligation towards the gentiles.’ They tell a lie
against God and they know it. 76 No indeed! God loves those who
keep their pledges and are mindful of Him, 77 but those who sell out
God’s covenant and their own oaths for a small price will have no
share in the life to come. God will neither speak to them nor look at
them on the Day of Resurrection–– He will not cleanse them [of
their sins]–– agonizing torment awaits them. 78 There are some who
twist the Scripture with their tongues to make you [people] think
that what they say is part of the Scripture when it is not; they say it
is from God when it is not; they attribute lies to God and they
know it.
79 No person to whom God had given the Scripture, wisdom, and
prophethood would ever say to people, ‘Be my servants, not God’s.’
[He would say], ‘You should be devoted to God because you have
taught the Scripture and studied it closely.’ 80 He would never
command you to take angels and prophets as lords. How could
he command you to be disbelievers after you had devoted yourselves
to God?
81 God took a pledge from the prophets, saying, ‘If, after I have
bestowed Scripture and wisdom upon you, a messenger comes conﬁrming what you have been given, you must believe in him and
support him. Do you aﬃrm this and accept My pledge as binding on
you?’ They said, ‘We do.’ He said, ‘Then bear witness and I too will
bear witness.’ 82 Those who turn away after this are the ones who
break pledges.83 Do they seek anything other than submission to
God? Everyone in the heavens and earth submits to Him, willingly
or unwillingly; they will all be returned to Him.
84 Say [Muhammad], ‘We [Muslims] believe in God and in what
has been sent down to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and
the Tribes. We believe in what has been given to Moses, Jesus,
and the prophets from their Lord. We do not make a distinction
between any of the [prophets]. It is to Him that we devote ourselves.’
85 If anyone seeks a religion other than [islam] complete devotion to

3: 99

The Family of  Imran

41

God, it will not be accepted from him: he will be one of the losers in
the Hereafter. 86 Why would God guide people who deny the truth,
after they have believed and acknowledged that the Messenger is
true, and after they have been shown clear proof? God does not
guide evildoers: 87 such people will be rewarded with rejection by
God, by the angels, by all people, 88 and so they will remain, with
no relief or respite for their suﬀering. 89 Not so those who afterwards
repent and mend their ways–– God is most forgiving and merciful––
90[although] the repentance of those who, having believed, then
increase in their disbelief, will not be accepted. They are the ones
who have gone [far] astray: 91 those who disbelieve and die disbelievers will not be saved even if they oﬀer enough gold to ﬁll the
entire earth. Agonizing torment is in store for them, and there will
be no one to help them. 92 None of you [believers] will attain true
piety unless you give out of what you cherish: whatever you give,
God knows about it very well.
93 Except for what Israel made unlawful for himself, all food was
lawful to the Children of Israel before the Torah was revealed. a Say,
‘Bring the Torah and read out [the relevant passage] if you are telling
the truth. 94 Those who persist in making up lies and attributing
them to God after this are the wrongdoers.’ 95 [Prophet], say, ‘God
speaks the truth, so follow Abraham’s religion: he had true faith and
he was never an idolater.’ 96 The ﬁrst House [of worship] to be established for people was the one at Mecca. b It is a blessed place; a source
of guidance for all people; 97 there are clear signs in it; it is the place
where Abraham stood to pray; whoever enters it is safe. Pilgrimage
to the House is a duty owed to God by people who are able to
undertake it. Those who reject this [should know that] God has no
need of anyone. 98 Say, ‘People of the Book, why do you reject God’s
revelations? God witnesses everything you do.’ 99 Say, ‘People of the
Book, why do you turn the believers away from God’s path and try
to make it crooked, when you yourselves [should be] witnesses to the
[truth]? God is not heedless of anything you do.’
a The commentators explain that Israel/Jacob (Abraham’s grandson) vowed to give
up camel ﬂesh and camel milk if he were relieved of his sciatica, and the Jews in Medina
argued with Muhammad: ‘You claim to be following the religion of Abraham. If this
were so you would not be eating camel meat and drinking its milk, as these are forbidden
in Abraham’s religion.’ This verse answers this argument (Razi).
b The original reads Bakka, which was an old name for Mecca.

42

The Qur an

3: 100

100 You who believe, some of those who were given the Scripture
would turn you into disbelievers if you were to yield to them.
101 How can you disbelieve when God’s revelations are being recited
to you and His Messenger is living among you? Whoever holds fast
to God will be guided to the straight path. 102 You who believe, be
mindful of God, as is His due, and make sure you devote yourselves
to Him, to your dying moment. 103 Hold fast to God’s rope all
together; do not split into factions. Remember God’s favour to you:
you were enemies and then He brought your hearts together and
you became brothers by His grace; you were about to fall into a pit
of Fire and He saved you from it–– in this way God makes His
revelations clear to you so that you may be rightly guided. 104 Be a a
community that calls for what is good, urges what is right, and
forbids what is wrong: those who do this are the successful ones.
105 Do not be like those who, after they have been given clear revelation, split into factions and fall into disputes: a terrible punishment
awaits such people. 106 On the Day when some faces brighten and
others darken, it will be said to those with darkened faces, ‘How
could you reject your faith after believing? Taste the torment for
doing so,’ 107 but those with brightened faces will be in God’s grace,
there to remain. 108 These are God’s revelations: We recite them to
you [Prophet] with the Truth. God does not will injustice for His
creatures. 109 Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God; it
is to Him that all things return.
110 [Believers], you are the best community singled out for people:
you order what is right, forbid what is wrong, and believe in God. If
the People of the Book had also believed, it would have been better
for them. For although some of them do believe, most of them are
lawbreakers–– 111 they will not do you much harm: even if they come
out to ﬁght you, they will soon turn tail; they will get no help––
112 and, unless they hold fast to a lifeline from God and from mankind, they are overshadowed by vulnerability wherever they are
found. They have drawn God’s wrath upon themselves. They are
overshadowed by weakness, too, because they have persistently disbelieved in God’s revelation and killed prophets without any right,
all because of their disobedience and boundless transgression. 113 But
they are not all alike. There are some among the People of the Book
a Razi explains that the preposition min in the Arabic, usually translated as ‘let there
be among you’, here applies to the whole community, not just part of it.

3: 128

The Family of  Imran

43

who are upright, who recite God’s revelations during the night, who
bow down in worship, 114 who believe in God and the Last Day, who
order what is right and forbid what is wrong, who are quick to do
good deeds. These people are among the righteous 115 and they will
not be denied [the reward] for whatever good deeds they do: God
knows exactly who is conscious of Him.
116 As for those who disbelieve, neither their possessions nor their
children will help them against God–– they will be companions in
the Fire, there to remain–– 117 and whatever they give away in this life
will be nulliﬁed: a frosty wind strikes and destroys the harvest of
people who have wronged themselves. It was not God who wronged
them; they wronged themselves.
118 You who believe, do not take for your intimates such outsiders
as spare no eﬀort to ruin you and want to see you suﬀer: their hatred
is evident from their mouths, but what their hearts conceal is far
worse. We have made Our revelations clear for you; will you not use
your reason? 119 This is how it is: here you are, you love them, but
they do not love you; you believe in all the Scriptures and when they
meet you, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they are alone, they bite
their ﬁngertips in rage at you. [Prophet], say, ‘Die of rage [if you
wish]!’ God knows exactly what is in everyone’s hearts. 120 They
grieve at any good that befalls you [believers] and rejoice at your
misfortunes. But if you are steadfast and conscious of God, their
scheming will not harm you in the least: God encircles everything
they do.
121 [Prophet], remember when you left your home at dawn to
assign battle positions to the believers: God hears and knows everything. 122 Remember when two groups of you were about to lose heart
and God protected them–– let the believers put their trust in God––
123 God helped you at Badr when you were very weak. Be mindful of
God, so that you may be grateful. 124 Remember when you said to the
believers, ‘Will you be satisﬁed if your Lord reinforces you by sending down three thousand angels? 125 Well, if you are steadfast and
mindful of God, your Lord will reinforce you with ﬁve thousand
swooping angels if the enemy should suddenly attack you!’ and God
arranged it so, 126 as a message of hope for you [believers] to put your
hearts at rest–– help comes only from God, the Mighty, the Wise––
127 and in order to cut oﬀ the ﬂanks of the disbelievers’ army and
frustrate them, to make them withdraw in total defeat. 128 Whether

44

The Qur an

3: 129

God relents towards them or punishes them is not for you [Prophet]
to decide: they are wrongdoers. 129 Everything in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. He forgives whoever He will and punishes
whoever He will: God is most forgiving and merciful.
130 You who believe, do not consume usurious interest, doubled
and redoubled. Be mindful of God so that you may prosper––
131 beware of the Fire prepared for those who ignore [Him]–– 132 and
obey God and the Prophet so that you may be given mercy. 133 Hurry
towards your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the
heavens and earth prepared for the righteous, 134 who give, both in
prosperity and adversity, who restrain their anger and pardon
people–– God loves those who do good–– 135 those who remember
God and implore forgiveness for their sins if they do something
shameful or wrong themselves–– who forgives sins but God?–– and
who never knowingly persist in doing wrong. 136 The reward for such
people is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens graced with
ﬂowing streams, where they will remain. How excellent is the reward
of those who labour!
137 God’s ways have operated before your time: travel through the
land, and see what was the end of those who disbelieved. 138 This is a
clear lesson to people, and guidance and teaching for those who are
mindful of God. 139 Do not lose heart or despair–– if you are true
believers you have the upper hand–– 140 if you have suﬀered a blow,
they too have suﬀered one like it. a We deal out such days among
people in turn, for God to ﬁnd out who truly believes, for Him to
choose martyrs b from among you–– God does not love evildoers––
141 for Him to cleanse those who believe and for Him to destroy the
disbelievers. 142 Did you think you would enter the Garden without
God ﬁrst proving which of you would struggle for His cause and
remain steadfast? 143 Before you encountered death, you were hoping
for it. Well, now you have seen it with your own eyes.
144 Muhammad is only a messenger before whom many messengers
a This part of the sura refers to the Battle of Uhud, where the Muslims were
defeated, having disobeyed the Prophet’s orders.
b The noun shahid is much more complex than the term ‘martyr’ chosen to render it
in this context. The root sh–h–d conveys ‘to witness, to be present, to attend’, but also
‘to testify’ or ‘to give evidence’. Thus the ‘martyrs’ here are chosen by God to witness
Him in heaven, are given the opportunity to give evidence of the depth of their faith
by sacriﬁcing their worldly lives, and will testify with the prophets on the Day of
Judgement.

3: 154

The Family of  Imran

45

have been and gone. If he died or was killed, a would you revert to
your old ways? If anyone did so, he would not harm God in the least.
God will reward the grateful. 145 No soul may die except with God’s
permission at a predestined time. If anyone strives for the rewards of
this world, We will give him some of them. If anyone strives for the
rewards of the Hereafter, We will give him some of them: We will
reward the grateful. 146 Many prophets have fought, with large bands
of godly men alongside them who, in the face of their suﬀerings for
God’s cause, did not lose heart or weaken or surrender: God loves
those who are steadfast. 147 All they said was, ‘Our Lord, forgive us
our sins and our excesses. Make our feet ﬁrm, and give us help
against the disbelievers,’ 148 and so God gave them both the rewards
of this world and the excellent rewards of the Hereafter: God loves
those who do good.
149 You who believe, if you obey the disbelievers, they will make
you revert to your old ways and you will turn into losers. 150 No
indeed! It is God who is your protector: He is the best of helpers.
151 We will strike panic into the disbelievers’ hearts because they
attribute partners to God although He has sent no authority for this:
their shelter will be the Fire–– how miserable is the home of the
evildoers! 152 God fulﬁlled His promise to you: you were routing
them, with His permission, but then you faltered, disputed the
order, and disobeyed, once He had brought you within sight of your
goal b – some of you desire the gains of this world and others desire
the world to come–– and then He prevented you from [defeating]
them as a punishment. He has now forgiven you: God is most gracious to the believers. 153 You ﬂed without looking back while the
Messenger was calling out to you from behind, and God rewarded
you with sorrow for sorrow. [He has now forgiven you] so that you
may not grieve for what you missed or for what happened to you.
God is well aware of everything you do. 154 After sorrow, He caused
calm to descend upon you, a sleep that overtook some of you.
Another group, caring only for themselves, entertained false
thoughts about God, thoughts more appropriate to pagan ignorance,
and said, ‘Do we get a say in any of this?’ [Prophet], tell them,
a

In the Battle of Uhud, it was rumoured that Muhammad had been killed.
The archers disobeyed the Prophet’s order to remain in their positions until the
end. They thought the Muslims had won and dashed to get the booty. This allowed their
enemies to regroup and attack, so winning the battle.
b

46

The Qur an

3: 155

‘Everything to do with this aﬀair is in God’s hands.’ They conceal in
their hearts things they will not reveal to you. They say, ‘If we had
had our say in this, none of us would have been killed here.’ Tell
them, ‘Even if you had resolved to stay at home, those who were
destined to be killed would still have gone out to meet their deaths.’
God did this in order to test everything within you and in order to
prove what is in your hearts. God knows your innermost thoughts
very well. 155 As for those of you who turned away on the day the two
armies met in battle, it was Satan who caused them to slip, through
some of their actions. God has now pardoned them: God is most
forgiving and forbearing.
156 You who believe, do not be like those who disbelieved and said
of their brothers who went out on a journey or a raid, ‘If only they
had stayed with us they would not have died or been killed,’ for God
will make such thoughts a source of anguish in their hearts. It is God
who gives life and death; God sees everything you do. 157 Whether
you are killed for God’s cause or die, God’s forgiveness and mercy
are better than anything people amass. 158 Whether you die or are
killed, it is to God that you will be gathered.
159 By an act of mercy from God, you [Prophet] were gentle in
your dealings with them–– had you been harsh, or hard-hearted, they
would have dispersed and left you–– so pardon them and ask forgiveness for them. Consult with them about matters, then, when you
have decided on a course of action, put your trust in God: God loves
those who put their trust in Him. 160 If God helps you [believers], no
one can overcome you; if He forsakes you, who else can help you?
Believers should put their trust in God.
161 It is inconceivable that a prophet would ever dishonestly take
something from the battle gains. Anyone who does so will carry it
with him on the Day of Resurrection, when each soul will be fully
repaid for what it has done: no one will be wronged. 162 Can the man
who pursues God’s good pleasure be like the man who has brought
God’s wrath upon himself and whose home will be Hell–– a foul
destination? 163 They are in a diﬀerent class in God’s eyes; God sees
exactly what they do.
164 God has been truly gracious to the believers in sending them a
Messenger from among their own, to recite His revelations to them,
to make them grow in purity, and to teach them the Scripture and
wisdom–– before that they were clearly astray. 165 Why do you

The Family of  Imran

3: 179

47

[believers] say, when a calamity befalls you, even after you have
inﬂicted twice as much damage [on your enemy], ‘How did this
happen?’? [Prophet], say, ‘You brought it upon yourselves.’ God has
power over everything: 166 what befell you on the day the two armies
met in battle happened with God’s permission and in order for Him
to see who were the true believers and who were the hypocrites who,
167 when it was said to them, ‘Come, ﬁght for God’s cause, or at least
defend yourselves,’ answered, ‘We would follow you if we knew there
was going to be ﬁghting.’ On that day they were closer to disbelief
than belief. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts:
God knows exactly what they conceal.
168 As for those who stayed behind, and said of their brothers, ‘If
only they had listened to us, they would not have been killed,’ tell them
[Prophet], ‘Ward oﬀ death from yourselves, if what you say is true.’
169 [Prophet], do not think of those who have been killed in God’s way
as dead. They are alive with their Lord, well provided for, 170 happy
with what God has given them of His favour; rejoicing that for those
they have left behind who have yet to join them there is no fear, nor will
they grieve; 171 [rejoicing] in God’s blessing and favour, and that God
will not let the reward of the believers be lost. 172 Those who responded
to God and the Messenger after suﬀering defeat, who do good and
remain conscious of God, will have a great reward. 173 Those whose
faith only increased when people said, ‘Fear your enemy: they have
amassed a great army against you,’ and who replied, ‘God is enough
for us: He is the best protector,’ 174 returned with grace and bounty
from God; no harm befell them. They pursued God’s good pleasure. God’s favour is great indeed. 175 It is Satan who urges you to fear
his followers; do not fear them, but fear Me, if you are true believers.
176 [Prophet], do not be grieved by those who are quick to disbelieve. They will not harm God in the least; it is God’s will that
they will have no share in the Hereafter–– a terrible torment awaits
them. 177 Those who sell their faith for disbelief will not harm God in
any way; agonizing torment awaits them. 178 The disbelievers should
not think that it is better for them that We give them more time:
when We give them more time they become more sinful–– a shameful
torment awaits them. 179 Nor was it God’s aim to leave you as you
were, with no separation between the bad and the good. a God
a

With hypocrites mixing with them (Razi). See verses 166–7.

48

The Qur an

3: 180

would not show you [people] what is hidden; God chooses as His
messengers whoever He will. So believe in God and His messengers:
if you believe and stay mindful of God, you will have a great reward.
180 Those who are miserly with what God has granted them out of
His grace should not think that it is good for them; on the contrary,
it is bad for them. Whatever they meanly withhold will be hung
around their necks on the Day of Resurrection. It is God who will
inherit the heavens and earth: God is well aware of everything
you do.
181 God has certainly heard the words of those who sneer, ‘So God
is poor, while we are rich’. a We shall record everything they say–– as
well as their killing of prophets in deﬁance of all that is right–– and
We shall say to them, ‘Taste the torment of the scorching ﬁre.
182 That is on account of what you stored up for yourselves with your
own hands: God is never unjust to His servants.’ 183 To those who
say, ‘God has commanded us not to believe in any messenger unless
he brings us an oﬀering that ﬁre [from heaven] consumes,’ say
[Prophet], ‘Messengers before me have come to you with clear signs,
including the one you mention. If you are sincere, why did you kill
them?’ 184 If they reject you, so have other messengers been rejected
before you, even though they came with clear evidence, books of
wisdom and enlightening scripture. 185 Every soul will taste death
and you will be paid in full only on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever is kept away from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will have
triumphed. The present world is only an illusory pleasure: 186 you are
sure to be tested through your possessions and persons; you are sure
to hear much that is hurtful from those who were given the Scripture
before you and from those who associate others with God. If you are
steadfast and mindful of God, that is the best course.
187 God took a pledge from those who were given the Scripture––
‘Make it known to people; do not conceal it’–– but they tossed the
pledge over their shoulders, they bartered it for a small price: what a
bad bargain they made! 188 Do not think [Prophet] that those who
exult in what they have done and seek praise for things they have not
done will escape the torment; agonizing torment awaits them.
189 Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God; God has
a A retort to 2: 245, which was often cited by the Prophet when asking for ﬁnancial
contributions to the cause.

The Family of  Imran

3: 200

49

power over everything. 190 There truly are signs in the creation of the
heavens and earth, and in the alternation of night and day, for those
with understanding, 191 who remember God standing, sitting, and
lying down, who reﬂect on the creation of the heavens and earth:
‘Our Lord! You have not created all this without purpose–– You are
far above that!–– so protect us from the torment of the Fire. 192 Our
Lord! You will truly humiliate those You commit to the Fire. The
evildoers have no one to help them. 193 Our Lord! We have heard
someone calling us to faith––“ Believe in your Lord”–– and we have
believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, wipe out our bad deeds, and
grant that we join the righteous when we die. 194 Our Lord! Bestow
upon us all that You have promised us through Your messengers––
do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection–– You never break
Your promise.’ 195 Their Lord has answered them: ‘I will not allow
the deeds of any one of you to be lost, whether you are male or
female, each is like the other [in rewards]. a I will certainly wipe out
the bad deeds of those who emigrated and were driven out of their
homes, who suﬀered harm for My cause, who fought and were
killed. I will certainly admit them to Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams, as a reward from God: the best reward is with God.’
196 [Prophet], do not be deceived by the disbelievers’ [lucrative]
trading to and fro in the land: 197 this is only a brief enjoyment, after
which Hell will be their home–– a miserable resting place! 198 But
those who were mindful of their Lord will have Gardens graced with
ﬂowing streams where they will stay as a reward from God. What
God has is best for those who are truly good.
199 Some of the People of the Book believe in God, in what has
been sent down to you and in what was sent down to them: humbling
themselves before God, they would never sell God’s revelation for a
small price. These people will have their rewards with their Lord:
God is swift in reckoning. 200 You who believe, be steadfast, more
steadfast than others; be ready; b always be mindful of God, so that
you may prosper.
a
b

Literally ‘you come from each other’, i.e. you are equal.
‘For prayer’ or ‘to ward oﬀ an attack’.

4. WOMEN
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the many references to women
throughout the sura (verses 3–4, 127–30). It gives a number of instructions,
urging justice to children and orphans, and mentioning inheritance and marriage laws. Verses 5–12 of the sura give rulings on property and inheritance,
and so does the verse which concludes the sura. The sura also talks of the tensions
between the Muslim community in Medina and some of the People of the Book
(verses 44, 61), moving into a general discussion of war: it warns the Muslims
to be cautious and to defend the weak and helpless (verses 71–6). Another
similar theme is the intrigues of the hypocrites (verses 88–91, 138–46).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 People, be mindful of your Lord, who created you from a single
soul, and from it a created its mate, and from the pair of them spread
countless men and women far and wide; be mindful of God, in
whose name you make requests of one another. Beware of severing
the ties of kinship: b God is always watching over you. 2 Give orphans
their property, do not replace [their] good things with bad, and do
not consume their property with your own––a great sin. 3 If you
fear that you will not deal fairly with orphan girls, c you may marry
whichever [other] d women seem good to you, two, three, or four. If
you fear that you cannot be equitable [to them], then marry only one,
or your slave(s): e that is more likely to make you avoid bias. 4 Give
women their bridal gift upon marriage, though if they are happy to
give up some of it for you, you may enjoy it with a clear conscience.
5 Do not entrust your property to the feeble-minded. God has
made it a means of support for you: make provision for them from it,
clothe them, and address them kindly. 6 Test orphans until they reach
marriageable age; then, if you ﬁnd they have sound judgement, hand
a ‘From the same essence’. Razi convincingly reached this conclusion based on
comparison with many instances when min anfusikum is used in the Qur an.
b Literally ‘the womb-relationships’, i.e. all those to whom you are related. This
expression occurs again in 47: 22.
c In pre-Islamic Arabia, some guardians of orphan girls used to marry them in order
to take their property (see 4: 127).
d This is a widely accepted interpretation.
e ‘Literally ‘what your right hands possess’.

4: 13

Women

51

over their property to them. Do not consume it hastily before they
come of age: if the guardian is well oﬀ he should abstain from the
orphan’s property, and if he is poor he should use only what is fair.
When you give them their property, call witnesses in; but God takes
full account of everything you do. a
7 Men shall have a share in what their parents and closest relatives
leave, and women shall have a share in what their parents and closest
relatives leave, whether the legacy be small or large: this is ordained
by God. 8 If other relatives, orphans, or needy people are present at
the distribution, give them something too, and speak kindly to them.
9 Let those who would fear for the future of their own helpless children, if they were to die, show the same concern [for orphans]; let
them be mindful of God and speak out for justice. 10 Those who
consume the property of orphans unjustly are actually swallowing
ﬁre into their own bellies: they will burn in the blazing Flame.
11 Concerning your children, God commands you that a son
should have the equivalent share of two daughters. If there are only
daughters, two or more should share two-thirds of the inheritance, if
one, she should have half. Parents inherit a sixth each if the deceased
leaves children; if he leaves no children and his parents are his sole
heirs, his mother has a third, unless he has brothers, in which case
she has a sixth. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of
any bequests or debts. You cannot know which of your parents or
your children is more beneﬁcial to you: this is a law from God, and
He is all knowing, all wise. 12 You inherit half of what your wives
leave, if they have no children; if they have children, you inherit a
quarter. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any
bequests or debts. If you have no children, your wives’ share is a
quarter; if you have children, your wives get an eighth. [In all cases,
the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts. If a
man or a woman dies leaving no children or parents, b but a single
brother or sister, he or she should take one-sixth of the inheritance;
if there are more siblings, they share one-third between them. [In all
cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or
debts, with no harm done to anyone: this is a commandment from
God: God is all knowing and benign to all. 13 These are the bounds
a

kaﬀa bi here is used idiomatically.
This is the most generally accepted meaning of the Arabic word kalala. There are
many others.
b

52

The Qur an

4: 14

set by God: God will admit those who obey Him and His Messenger
to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and there they will stay––
that is the supreme triumph! 14 But those who disobey God and His
Messenger and overstep His limits will be consigned by God to the
Fire, and there they will stay–– a humiliating torment awaits them!
15 If any of your women commit a lewd act, call four witnesses from
among you, then, if they testify to their guilt, keep the women at home
until death comes to them or until God shows them another way. a
16 If two men commit a lewd act, punish them both; if they repent and
mend their ways, leave them alone–– God is always ready to accept
repentance, He is full of mercy. 17 But God only undertakes to accept
repentance from those who do evil out of ignorance and soon afterwards repent: these are the ones God will forgive, He is all knowing,
all wise. 18 It is not true repentance when people continue to do evil
until death confronts them and then say, ‘Now I repent,’ nor when
they die deﬁant: We have prepared a painful torment for these.
19 You who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against
their will, b nor should you treat your wives harshly, hoping to take
back some of the bride-gift you gave them, unless they are guilty of
something clearly outrageous. Live with them in accordance with
what is fair and kind: if you dislike them, it may well be that you
dislike something in which God has put much good. 20 If you wish to
replace one wife with another, do not take any of her bride-gift back,
even if you have given her a great amount of gold. 21 How could you
take it when this is unjust and a blatant sin? How could you take it
when you have lain with each other and they have taken a solemn
pledge from you?
22 Do not marry women that your fathers married–– with the
exception of what is past–– this is indeed a shameful thing to do,
loathsome and leading to evil. 23 You are forbidden to take as wives
your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal and maternal aunts, the
daughters of brothers and daughters of sisters, your milk-mothers
and milk-sisters, c your wives’ mothers, the stepdaughters in your
a Through another regulation, or marriage, or any other way. See also end of 65: 2,
which uses nearly identical words.
b In pre-Islamic Arabia, if a man died leaving a widow, her stepson or another man of
his family could inherit her.
c Islam regards women who breastfeed other people’s infants as their ‘milkmothers’, not merely ‘wet nurses’.

4: 32

Women

53

care–– those born of women with whom you have consummated
marriage, if you have not consummated the marriage, then you will
not be blamed–– wives of your begotten sons, two sisters simultaneously–– with the exception of what is past: God is most forgiving
and merciful–– 24 women already married, other than your slaves. a
God has ordained all this for you. Other women are lawful to you, so
long as you seek them in marriage, with gifts from your property,
looking for wedlock rather than fornication. If you wish to enjoy
women through marriage, give them their bride-gift–– this is obligatory–– though if you should choose mutually, after fulﬁlling this
obligation, to do otherwise [with the bride-gift], you will not be
blamed: God is all knowing and all wise.
25 If any of you does not have the means to marry a believing free
woman, then marry a believing slave–– God knows best [the depth
of] your faith: you are [all] part of the same family b – so marry them
with their people’s consent and their proper bride-gifts. [Make
them] married women, not adulteresses or lovers. If they commit
adultery when they are married, their punishment will be half that of
free women. This is for those of you who fear that you will sin; it is
better for you to practise self-restraint. God is most forgiving and
merciful, 26 He wishes to make His laws clear to you and guide you to
the righteous ways of those who went before you. He wishes to turn
towards you in mercy–– He is all knowing, all wise–– 27 He wishes to
turn towards you, but those who follow their lusts want you to go far
astray. 28 God wishes to lighten your burden; man was created weak.
29 You who believe, do not wrongfully consume each other’s wealth
but trade by mutual consent. Do not kill each other, for God is
merciful to you. 30 If any of you does these things, out of hostility and
injustice, We shall make him suﬀer Fire: that is easy for God. 31 But if
you avoid the great sins you have been forbidden, We shall wipe
out your minor misdeeds and let you in through the entrance of
honour. 32 Do not covet what God has given to some of you more than
others–– men have the portion they have earned; c and women the
a Slave women were often unclaimed war captives, who would not be in a position to
dissolve any previous marriage. An owner was not permitted to touch a slave woman
whose husband was with her (Abu Hanifa, in Razi).
b Literally ‘you are from one another’.
c The preposition min here is taken to have an explanatory rather than a partitive
function, which would render the translation ‘some of what they have earned’.

54

The Qur an

4: 33

portion they have earned–– you should rather ask God for some of
His bounty: He has full knowledge of everything. 33 We have
appointed heirs for everything that parents and close relatives leave
behind, including those to whom you have pledged your hands [in
marriage], so give them their share: God is witness to everything.
34 Husbands should take good care of their wives, with a [the bounties] God has given to some more than others and with what they
spend out of their own money. Righteous wives are devout and guard
what God would have them guard in their husbands’ absence. If you
fear high-handedness b from your wives, remind them [of the teachings of God], then ignore them when you go to bed, then hit them. c
If they obey you, you have no right to act against them: God is
most high and great. 35 If you [believers] fear that a couple may break
up, appoint one arbiter from his family and one from hers. Then,
if the couple want to put things right, God will bring about a
reconciliation between them: He is all knowing, all aware.
36 Worship God; join nothing with Him. Be good to your parents,
to relatives, to orphans, to the needy, to neighbours near and far, to
travellers in need, and to your slaves. God does not like arrogant,
boastful people, 37 who are miserly and order other people to be the
same, hiding the bounty God has given them. We have prepared a
humiliating torment for such ungrateful people. 38 [Nor does He like
those] who spend their wealth to show oﬀ, who do not believe in
Him or the Last Day. Whoever has Satan as his companion has an
evil companion! 39 What harm would it do them to believe in God
and the Last Day, and give charitably from the sustenance God has
given them? God knows them well. 40 He does not wrong anyone by
as much as the weight of a speck of dust: He doubles any good deed
and gives a tremendous reward of His own. 41 What will they do
when We bring a witness from each community, with you [Muhammad] as a witness against these people? 42 On that day, those who
disbelieved and disobeyed the Prophet will wish that the earth could
swallow them up: they will not be able to hide anything from God.
a

bi is interpreted as instrumental rather than causal.
The verb nashaza from which nushuz is derived means ‘to become high’, ‘to rise’.
See also verse 128, where the same word is applied to husbands. It applies to a situation
where one partner assumes superiority to the other and behaves accordingly.
c This signiﬁes a single blow, as is clear from the circumstances of the revelation of
this verse. See also Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an, 46–54.
b

4: 52

Women

55

43 You who believe, do not come anywhere near the prayer if you
are intoxicated, a not until you know what you are saying; nor if you
are in a state of major ritual impurity–– though you may pass
through the mosque b – not until you have bathed; if you are ill, on a
journey, have relieved yourselves, or had intercourse, and cannot ﬁnd
any water, then ﬁnd some clean sand c and wipe your faces and hands
with it. God is always ready to pardon and forgive.
44 [Prophet], have you not considered how those who were given a
share of the Scripture purchase misguidance and want you
[believers], too, to lose the right path? 45 God knows your enemies
best: God is enough to protect and to help you. 46 Some Jews distort
the meaning of [revealed] words: they say, ‘We hear and disobey,’ and
‘Listen,’ [adding the insult] ‘May you not hear,’ and ‘Ra ina [Look at
us],’ d twisting it abusively with their tongues so as to disparage
religion. If they had said, ‘We hear and obey,’ ‘Listen,’ and ‘Unzurna
[Look at us],’ that would have been better and more proper for them.
But God has spurned them for their deﬁance; they believe very little.
47 People of the Book, believe in what We have sent down to conﬁrm what you already have before We wipe out [your sense of ]
direction, e turning you back, or reject you, as We rejected those who
broke the Sabbath: God’s will is always done. 48 God does not forgive
the joining of partners with Him: anything less than that He forgives
to whoever He will, but anyone who joins partners with God has
concocted a tremendous sin. 49 [Prophet], have you considered those
who claim purity for themselves? No! God puriﬁes whoever He
will: no one will be wronged by as much as the husk of a date stone.
50 See how they invent lies about God, this in itself is a ﬂagrant
sin! 51 Do you not see how those given a share of the Scripture,
[evidently] now believe in idols and evil powers? They say of the
disbelievers, ‘They are more rightly guided than the believers.’ f
52 Those are the ones God has rejected: you [Prophet] will not ﬁnd
a The prohibition of intoxicants was introduced by stages, and they were eventually
made completely unlawful. Cf. 2: 219; 5: 90–1.
b or ‘unless you are on a journey’.
c The term sa id means dust or earth or soil or sand.
d Cf. note to 2: 104.
e Literally ‘obliterate faces’. Another meaning of wujuh (faces) is ‘directions’ (Razi).
f This is taken to refer to an actual event in which a group of disbelieving Meccans
went to two eminent Jewish ﬁgures for counsel on the truth of Muhammad’s teachings
and were told that the pagans were more rightly guided than the Muslims.

56

The Qur an

4: 53

anyone to help those God has rejected. 53 Do they have any share
of what He possesses? If they did they would not give away so
much as the groove of a date stone. 54 Do they envy [other] people
for the bounty a God has granted them? We gave the descendants of
Abraham the Scripture and wisdom–– and We gave them a great
kingdom–– 55 but some of them believed in it b and some turned away
from it. Hell blazes ﬁercely enough. 56 We shall send those who reject
Our revelations to the Fire. When their skins have been burned away,
We shall replace them with new ones so that they may continue to
feel the pain: God is mighty and wise. 57 As for those who believe and
do good deeds, We shall admit them into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams and there they will remain forever. They will have pure
spouses there, and We shall admit them into cool refreshing shade.
58 God commands you [people] to return things entrusted to you
to their rightful owners, and, if you judge between people, to do so
with justice: God’s instructions to you are excellent, for He hears
and sees everything. 59 You who believe, obey God and the Messenger, and those in authority among you. If you are in dispute over any
matter, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you truly believe in
God and the Last Day: that is better and fairer in the end. 60 Do you
[Prophet] not see those who claim to believe in what has been sent
down to you, and in what was sent down before you, yet still want to
turn to unjust tyrants c for judgement, although they have been
ordered to reject them? Satan wants to lead them far astray. 61 When
they are told, ‘Turn to God’s revelations and the Messenger [for
judgement],’ you see the hypocrites turn right away from you
[Prophet]. 62 If disaster strikes them because of what they themselves have done, then they will come to you, swearing by God, ‘We
only wanted to do good and achieve harmony.’ 63 God knows well
what is in the hearts of these people, so ignore what they say,
instruct them, and speak to them about themselves using penetrating
words.
64 All the messengers We sent were meant to be obeyed, by God’s
leave. If only [the hypocrites] had come to you [Prophet] when they

a

i.e. the Prophethood given to Muhammad.
The pronoun hi here refers to either (i) the Scripture or (ii) Abraham.
c The Arabic taghut is variously interpreted to refer to idols, a speciﬁc tyrant, an
oracle, or an opponent of the Prophet.
b

4: 77

Women

57

wronged themselves, and begged God’s forgiveness, and the
Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found
that God accepts repentance and is most merciful. 65 By your Lord,
they will not be true believers until they let you decide between them
in all matters of dispute, and ﬁnd no resistance in their souls to your
decisions, accepting them totally–– 66 if We had ordered, ‘Lay down
your lives’ or ‘Leave your homes,’ they would not have done so,
except for a few–– it would have been far better for them and
stronger conﬁrmation of their faith, if they had done as they were
told, 67 and We would have given them a rich reward of Our own
68 and guided them to a straight path. 69 Whoever obeys God and the
Messenger will be among those He has blessed: the messengers, the
truthful, those who bear witness to the truth, a and the righteous––
what excellent companions these are! 70 That is God’s favour. No one
knows better than Him.
71 You who believe, be on your guard. March [to battle] in small
groups or as one body. 72 Among you there is the sort of person who
is sure to lag behind: if a calamity befalls you, he says, ‘God has been
gracious to me that I was not there with them,’ 73 yet he is sure to say,
if you are favoured by God, ‘If only I had been with them, I could
have made great gains,’ as if there had been no ties of aﬀection
between you and him. 74 Let those of you who are willing to trade the
life of this world for the life to come, ﬁght in God’s way. To anyone
who ﬁghts in God’s way, whether killed or victorious, We shall give a
great reward. 75 Why should you not ﬁght in God’s cause and for
those oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, ‘Lord,
rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors! By Your
grace, give us a protector and give us a helper!’? 76 The believers ﬁght
for God’s cause, while those who reject faith ﬁght for an unjust
cause. b Fight the allies of Satan: Satan’s strategies are truly weak.
77 [Prophet], do you not see those who were told, ‘Restrain yourselves from ﬁghting, perform the prayer, and pay the prescribed
alms’? When ﬁghting was ordained for them, some of them feared
men as much as, or even more than, they feared God, saying, ‘Lord,
why have You ordained ﬁghting for us? If only You would give us
just a little more time.’ Say to them, ‘Little is the enjoyment in this
a

Martyrs bear witness to the truth with their lives (Razi).
Again this is the term taghut, which has a multitude of meanings. See note to
verse 60.
b

58

The Qur an

4: 78

world, the Hereafter is far better for those who are mindful of God:
you will not be wronged by as much as the ﬁbre in a date stone.
78 Death will overtake you no matter where you may be, even inside
high towers.’ When good fortune comes their way, they say, ‘This is
from God,’ but when harm befalls them, they say, ‘This is from you
[Prophet].’ Say to them, ‘Both come from God.’ What is the matter
with these people that they can barely understand what they are
told? 79 Anything good that happens to you [Prophet] is from God;
anything bad is [ultimately] from yourself. We have sent you as a
messenger to people; God is suﬃcient witness. 80 Whoever obeys the
Messenger obeys God. If some pay no heed, We have not sent you to
be their keeper. 81They say, ‘We obey you,’ but as soon as they leave
your presence, some of them scheme by night to do other than what
you said. God records what they scheme, so leave them alone, and
put your trust in God: He is suﬃcient protector.
82 Will they not think about this Qur an? If it had been from
anyone other than God, they would have found much inconsistency
in it. 83 Whenever news of any matter comes to them, whether
concerning peace or war, they spread it about; if they referred it to
the Messenger and those in authority among them, those seeking
its meaning would have found it out from them. If it were not
for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, you would almost all have
followed Satan.
84 So [Prophet] ﬁght in God’s way. You are accountable only for
yourself. Urge the believers on. God may well curb the power of
the disbelievers, for He is stronger in might and more terrible
in punishment. 85 Whoever speaks for a a good cause will share in
its beneﬁts and whoever speaks for a bad cause will share in its
burden: God controls everything. 86 But [even in battle] when you
[believers] are oﬀered a greeting, respond with a better one, or at
least return it: b God keeps account of everything. 87 He is God: there
is no god but Him. He will gather you all together on the Day of
Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. Whose word can be
truer than God’s?
a It is reported that an individual asked the Prophet to exempt another from going
into battle. ‘Speaks for’ is one of the meanings of shafa a as explained by Razi, and it is
more ﬁtting for the context of urging the believer to ﬁght in God’s cause here. The other
meaning, ‘intercedes’, adopted by most translators does not ﬁt with the context.
b See 4: 94 and Razi’s comment.

4: 94

Women

59

88 [Believers], why are you divided in two about the hypocrites,
when God Himself has rejected them because of what they have
done? Do you want to guide those God has left to stray? If God leaves
anyone to stray, you [Prophet] will never ﬁnd the way for him. 89 They
would dearly like you to reject faith, as they themselves have done, to
be like them. So do not take them as allies until they migrate [to
Medina] for God’s cause. If they turn [on you], a then seize and kill
them wherever you encounter them. b Take none of them as an ally or
supporter. 90 But as for those who seek refuge with people with whom
you have a treaty, or who come over to you because their hearts shrink
from ﬁghting against you or against their own people, God could
have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. So
if they withdraw and do not ﬁght you, and oﬀer you peace, then God
gives you no way against them. 91 You will ﬁnd others who wish to be
safe from you, and from their own people, but whenever they are back
in a situation where they are tempted [to ﬁght you], they succumb to
it. So if they neither withdraw, nor oﬀer you peace, nor restrain
themselves from ﬁghting you, seize and kill them wherever you
encounter them: We give you clear authority against such people.
92 Never should a believer kill another believer, except by mistake.
If anyone kills a believer by mistake he must free one Muslim slave
and pay compensation to the victim’s relatives, unless they charitably
forgo it; if the victim belonged to a people at war with you but is a
believer, then the compensation is only to free a believing slave; if he
belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, then compensation should be handed over to his relatives, and a believing slave set
free. Anyone who lacks the means to do this must fast for two consecutive months by way of repentance to God: God is all knowing,
all wise. 93 If anyone kills a believer deliberately, the punishment for
him is Hell, and there he will remain: God is angry with him, and
rejects him, and has prepared a tremendous torment for him. 94 So,
you who believe, be careful when you go to ﬁght in God’s way, and
do not say to someone who oﬀers you a greeting of peace, ‘You are
not a believer,’ c out of desire for the chance gains of this life–– God
a That ‘turn with aggression’ is the intended meaning is clear from the context. Cf.
4: 91.
b See 2: 191.
c A Muslim killed someone in battle who had given him the Muslim greeting,
thinking that the man was trying to save himself, but the Prophet condemned this.

60

The Qur an

4: 95

has plenty of gains for you. You yourself were in the same position
[once], but God was gracious to you, so be careful: God is fully
aware of what you do.
95 Those believers who stay at home, apart from those with an
incapacity, are not equal to those who commit themselves and their
possessions to striving in God’s way. God has raised such people
to a rank above those who stay at home–– although He has promised
all believers a good reward, those who strive are favoured with a
tremendous reward above those who stay at home–– 96 high ranks
conferred by Him, as well as forgiveness, and mercy: God is most
forgiving and merciful.
97 When the angels take the souls of those who have wronged
themselves, a they ask them, ‘What circumstances were you in?’
They reply, ‘We were oppressed in this land,’ and the angels say,
‘But was God’s earth not spacious enough for you to migrate to
some other place?’ These people will have Hell as their refuge, an
evil destination, 98 but not so the truly helpless men, women, and
children who have no means in their power nor any way to leave––
99 God may well pardon these, for He is most pardoning and most
forgiving. Anyone who migrates for God’s cause will ﬁnd many a
refuge and great plenty in the earth, 100 and if anyone leaves home as
a migrant towards God and His Messenger and is then overtaken by
death, his reward from God is sure. God is most forgiving and most
merciful.
101 When you [believers] are travelling in the land, you will not be
blamed for shortening your prayers, if you fear the disbelievers may
harm you: they are your sworn enemies. 102 When you [Prophet] are
with the believers, leading them in prayer, let a group of them stand
up in prayer with you, taking their weapons with them, and when
they have ﬁnished their prostration, let them take up their positions
at the back. Then let the other group, who have not yet prayed, pray
with you, also on their guard and armed with their weapons: the
disbelievers would dearly like you to be heedless of your weapons
and baggage, in order for them to take you in a single assault. You
will not be blamed if you lay aside your arms when you are overtaken
by heavy rain or illness, but be on your guard. Indeed, God has
prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers. 103 After
a

By living in a place where they are unable to practise their religion.

4: 115

Women

61

performing the ritual prayer, continue to remember God–– standing,
sitting, and lying on your sides–– and once you are safe, keep up
regular prayer, for prayer is obligatory for the believers at prescribed
times. 104 Do not be faint-hearted in pursuing the enemy: if you
are suﬀering hardship, so are they, but you hope to receive something from God for which they cannot hope. God is all knowing
and wise.
105 We have sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the
truth so that you can judge between people in accordance with what
God has shown you. Do not be an advocate for those who betray
trust. a 106 Ask God for forgiveness: He is most forgiving and merciful. 107 Do not argue for those who betray their own souls: God does
not love anyone given to treachery and sin. 108 They try to hide themselves from people, but they cannot hide from God. He is with them
when they plot at night, saying things that do not please Him: He is
fully aware of everything they do. 109 There you [believers] are, arguing on their behalf in this life, but who will argue on their behalf
with God on the Day of Resurrection? Who will be their defender?
110 Yet anyone who does evil or wrongs his own soul and then asks
God for forgiveness will ﬁnd Him most forgiving and merciful.
111 He who commits sin does so against his own soul–– God is all
knowing and wise–– 112 and anyone who commits an oﬀence or a sin,
and then throws the blame on to some innocent person, has burdened himself with deceit as well as ﬂagrant sin.
113 If it were not for the grace of God and His mercy to you
[Prophet], a party of them would have tried to lead you astray; they
only lead themselves astray, and cannot harm you in any way, since
God has sent down the Scripture and Wisdom to you, and taught
you what you did not know. God’s bounty to you is great indeed.
114 There is no good in most of their secret talk, only in commanding
charity, or good, or reconciliation between people. To anyone who
does these things, seeking to please God, We shall give a rich reward;
115 if anyone opposes the Messenger, after guidance has been made
clear to him, and follows a path other than that of the believers, We
shall leave him on his chosen path–– We shall burn him in Hell, an
evil destination.
a A man from Medina stole a suit of armour and accused a Jew of doing it. He
brought his family to ask the Prophet to rule against the Jew and he was about to do this
when these verses were revealed (Razi).

62

The Qur an

4: 116

116 God does not forgive the worship of others beside Him––
though He does forgive whoever He will for lesser sins–– for whoever does this has gone far, far astray. 117 In His place the idolaters
invoke only females, a and Satan, the rebel 118 God rejected, who
said, ‘I will certainly take my due share of Your servants; 119 I will
mislead them and incite vain desires in them; I will command
them to slit the ears of cattle; b I will command them to tamper
with God’s creation.’ Whoever chooses Satan as a patron instead
of God is utterly ruined: 120 he makes them promises and raises
false hopes, but Satan’s promises are nothing but delusion. 121 Such
people will have Hell for their home and will ﬁnd no escape from
it, 122 but We shall admit those who believe and do good deeds into
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, there to remain for ever–– a
true promise from God. Who speaks more truly than God? 123 It
will not be according to your hopes or those of the People of the
Book: anyone who does wrong will be requited for it and will ﬁnd
no one to protect or help him against God; 124 anyone, male or
female, who does good deeds and is a believer, will enter Paradise
and will not be wronged by as much as the dip in a date stone.
125 Who could be better in religion than those who direct themselves
wholly to God, do good, and follow the religion of Abraham, who
was true in faith? God took Abraham as a friend. 126 It is to God
that everything in the heavens and earth belongs: God is fully
aware of all things.
127 They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling about women. Say, ‘God
Himself gives you a ruling about them. You already have what has
been recited to you in the Scripture about orphan girls [in your
charge] from whom you withhold the prescribed shares [of their
inheritance] and whom you wish to marry, and also about helpless
children–– God instructs you to treat orphans fairly: He is well aware
of whatever good you do.’
128 If a wife fears high-handedness or alienation from her husband,
neither of them will be blamed if they come to a peaceful settlement,
for peace is best. Although human souls are prone to selﬁshness, if
you do good and are mindful of God, He is well aware of all that you
See also 53: 19–20.
An example of pagan superstitious practices: they used to dedicate cattle to their
gods by slitting their ears.
a
b

4: 140

Women

63

do. 129 You will never be able to treat your wives with equal fairness, however much you may desire to do so, but do not ignore one
wife altogether, leaving her suspended [between marriage and
divorce]. If you make amends and remain conscious of God, He is
most forgiving and merciful, 130 but if husband and wife do separate,
God will provide for each out of His plenty: He is inﬁnite in plenty,
and all wise. 131 Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs
to God.
We have commanded those who were given the Scripture before
you, and We command you, to be mindful of God. Even if you do
ignore Him, everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him,
and He is self-suﬃcient, worthy of all praise. 132 Yes, indeed, everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to God, and He is enough
for those who trust in Him. 133 If He so willed, He could remove you
altogether and replace you with new people: He has full power to
do so. 134 If some want the rewards of this world, the rewards of this
world and the next are both God’s to give: He hears and sees
everything.
135 You who believe, uphold justice and bear witness to God, even
if it is against yourselves, your parents, or your close relatives.
Whether the person is rich or poor, God can best take care of both.
Refrain from following your own desire, so that you can act justly––
if you distort or neglect justice, God is fully aware of what you do.
136 You who believe, believe in God and His Messenger and in the
Scripture He sent down to His Messenger, as well as what He sent
down before. Anyone who does not believe in God, His angels, His
Scriptures, His messengers, and the Last Day has gone far, far astray.
137 As for those who believe, then reject the faith, then believe again,
then reject the faith again and become increasingly deﬁant, God will
not forgive them, nor will He guide them on any path. 138 [Prophet],
tell such hypocrites that an agonizing torment awaits them.
139 Do those who ally themselves with the disbelievers rather than
the believers seek power through them? In reality all power is God’s
to give. 140 As He has already revealed to you [believers] in the Scripture, if you hear people denying and ridiculing God’s revelation, do
not sit with them unless they start to talk of other things, or else you
yourselves will become like them: a God will gather all the hypocrites
a

See 6: 68–– an earlier, Meccan sura.

64

The Qur an

4: 141

and disbelievers together into Hell. 141 The [hypocrites] wait to see
what happens to you and, if God brings you success, they say, ‘Were
we not on your side?’ but if the disbelievers have some success, they
say to them, ‘Did we not have the upper hand over you, and [yet]
protect you from the believers?’ God will judge between you all on
the Day of Resurrection, and He will give the disbelievers no means
of overcoming the believers.
142 The hypocrites try to deceive God, but it is He who causes
them to be deceived. When they stand up to pray, they do so sluggishly, showing oﬀ in front of people, and remember God only a
little, 143 wavering all the time between this and that, belonging neither to one side nor the other. If God leaves someone to stray, you
[Prophet] will never ﬁnd a way for him. 144 You who believe, do not
take the disbelievers as allies and protectors instead of the believers:
do you want to oﬀer God clear proof against you? 145 The hypocrites
will be in the lowest depths of Hell, and you will ﬁnd no one to help
them. 146 Not so those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to
God, and devote their religion entirely to Him: these will be joined
with the believers, and God will give the believers a mighty reward.
147 Why should God make you suﬀer torment if you are thankful and
believe in Him? God always rewards gratitude and He knows everything. 148 God does not like bad words to be made public unless
someone has been wronged: He is all hearing and all knowing. 149 If
you do good, openly or in secret, or if you pardon something bad, a
then God is most forgiving and powerful.
150 As for those who ignore God and His messengers and want to
make a distinction between them, saying, ‘We believe in some but
not in others,’ seeking a middle way, 151 they are really disbelievers:
We have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who disbelieve. 152 But God will give [due] rewards to those who believe in
Him and His messengers and make no distinction between any of
them. God is most forgiving and merciful.
153 The People of the Book demand that you [Prophet] make a
book physically come down to them from heaven, but they
demanded even more than that of Moses when they said, ‘Show us
God face to face,’ and were struck by the thunderbolt for their
a Razi suggests that this means: if the hypocrites repent, the believers should not
taunt them for what they did in the past.

4: 165

Women

65

presumption. Even after clear revelations had come down to them,
they took the calf as an object of worship, yet We pardoned this, and
gave Moses clear authority; 154 We made the mountain tower high
above them at their pledge; We said to them, ‘Enter the gate a humbly,’ and, ‘Do not break the Sabbath,’ and took a solemn pledge from
them. 155 And so for breaking their pledge, for rejecting God’s revelations, for unjustly killing their prophets, for saying ‘Our minds are
closed’ b – No! God has sealed them in their disbelief, so they believe
only a little–– 156 and because they disbelieved and uttered a terrible
slander against Mary, 157 and said, ‘We have killed the Messiah, Jesus,
son of Mary, the Messenger of God.’ (They did not kill him, nor did
they crucify him, though it was made to appear like that to them;
those that disagreed about him are full of doubt, with no knowledge
to follow, only supposition: they certainly did not kill him–– 158 God
raised him up to Himself. God is almighty and wise. 159 There is not
one of the People of the Book who will not believe in [Jesus] before
his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness
against them.) 160For the wrongdoings done by the Jews, We forbade
them certain good things that had been permitted to them before: for
having frequently debarred others from God’s path; 161 for taking
usury when they had been forbidden to do so; and for wrongfully
devouring other people’s property. For those of them that reject the
truth we have prepared an agonizing torment. 162 But those of them
who are well grounded in knowledge and have faith do believe in
what has been revealed to you [Muhammad], and in what was
revealed before you–– those who perform the prayers, pay the prescribed alms, and believe in God and the Last Day–– to them We
shall give a great reward.
163 We have sent revelation to you [Prophet] as We did to Noah and
the prophets after him, to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the
Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon–– to David We gave
the book [of Psalms]–– 164 to other messengers We have already
mentioned to you, and also to some We have not. To Moses God
spoke directly. 165 They were messengers bearing good news and
warning, so that mankind would have no excuse before God, once

a
b

The gate of the town mentioned in 2: 58; 7: 161.
Literally ‘our hearts are covered’, or ‘encased’. Cf. 2: 88.

66

The Qur an

4: 166

the messengers had been sent: God is almighty and all wise. 166 But
God Himself bears witness to what He has sent down to you–– He
sent it down with His full knowledge–– the angels too bear witness,
though God is suﬃcient witness. 167 Those who have disbelieved and
barred others from God’s path have gone far astray; 168 God will not
forgive those who have disbelieved and do evil, nor will He guide
them to any path 169 except that of Hell, where they will remain for
ever–– this is easy for God.
170 The Messenger has come to you [people] with the truth from
your Lord, so believe–– that is best for you–– for even if you disbelieve, all that is in the heavens and the earth still belongs to God,
and He is all knowing and all wise. 171 People of the Book, do not go
to excess in your religion, and do not say anything about God except
the truth: the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was nothing more than a
messenger of God, His word, directed to Mary, a spirit from Him.
So believe in God and His messengers and do not speak of a
‘Trinity’–– stop [this], that is better for you–– God is only one God,
He is far above having a son, everything in the heavens and earth
belongs to Him and He is the best one to trust. 172 The Messiah would
never disdain to be a servant of God, nor would the angels who are
close to Him. He will gather before Him all those who disdain His
worship and are arrogant: 173 to those who believe and do good works
He will give due rewards and more of His bounty; to those who are
disdainful and arrogant He will give an agonizing torment, and they
will ﬁnd no one besides God to protect or help them.
174 People, convincing proof has come to you from your Lord and
We have sent a clear light down to you. 175 God will admit those who
believe in Him and hold fast to Him into His mercy and favour; He
will guide them towards Him on a straight path.
176 They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling. Say, ‘God gives you a
ruling a about inheritance from someone who dies childless with no
surviving parents. If a man leaves a sister, she is entitled to half of the
inheritance; if she has no child her brother is her sole heir; if there
are two sisters, they are entitled to two-thirds of the inheritance
between them, but if there are surviving brothers and sisters, the
male is entitled to twice the share of the female. God makes this clear
to you so that you do not make mistakes: He has full knowledge of
everything.’
a

See also verse 12.

5. THE FEAST
The title relates to food, and a central theme of this Medinan sura is the
regulation of lawful and unlawful food, obedience to which is part of the pledge
between God and the believers (verses 1–5, 87–108). Part of the sura concerns
hunting for food during the pilgrimage and respect for the rites of pilgrimage.
God had also taken pledges from the Jews and Christians and the section between
verses 13 and 86 deals with what these two communities did to their pledges, and
with their relationships with the Muslims. The passage from verse 109 to the end
deals with the afterlife and the verdict of the messengers on the behaviour of their
respective communities. Jesus, in particular, is given prominence here: mention is
made of the feast for which his disciples asked him to pray to God, which gives the
sura its title, and of his renunciation of any claim to divinity.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 You who believe, fulﬁl your obligations. a Livestock animals are
lawful as food for you, with the exception of what is about to be
announced to you. You are forbidden to kill game while you are on
pilgrimage––God commands what He will, 2 so, you who believe, do
not violate the sanctity of God’s rites, the Sacred Month, the oﬀerings, their garlands, nor those going to the Sacred House to seek the
bounty and pleasure of their Lord––but when you have completed
the rites of pilgrimage you may hunt. Do not let your hatred for the
people who barred you from the Sacred Mosque induce you to break
the law: help one another to do what is right and good; do not help
one another towards sin and hostility. Be mindful of God, for His
punishment is severe.
3 You are forbidden to eat carrion; blood; pig’s meat; any animal over
which any name other than God’s has been invoked; any animal
strangled, or victim of a violent blow or a fall, or gored or savaged by a
beast of prey, unless you still slaughter it [in the correct manner];
or anything sacriﬁced on idolatrous altars. You are also forbidden
to allot shares [of meat] by drawing marked arrows b ––a heinous
a Obligations consequent on accepting the faith, including its dietary prohibitions.
See verse 7, ‘pledge’.
b A pagan Arab custom. Arrows were also used to make other decisions, as in drawing
lots, to determine the will of the idols (see verse 90).

68

The Qur an

5: 4

practice–– today the disbelievers have lost all hope that you will
give up your religion. Do not fear them: fear Me. Today I have
perfected your religion for you, completed My blessing upon you,
and chosen as your religion islam: [total devotion to God]; but if
any of you is forced by hunger to eat forbidden food, with no
intention of doing wrong, then God is most forgiving and
merciful.
4 They ask you, Prophet, what is lawful for them. Say, ‘All good
things are lawful for you.’ [This includes] what you have taught
your birds and beasts of prey to catch, teaching them as God has
taught you, so eat what they catch for you, but ﬁrst pronounce
God’s name over it. Be mindful of God: He is swift to take account.
5 Today all good things have been made lawful for you. The food of
the People of the Book is lawful for you as your food is lawful for
them. So are chaste, believing, women as well as chaste women of
the people who were given the Scripture before you, as long as you
have given them their bride-gifts and married them, not taking them
as lovers or secret mistresses. The deeds of anyone who rejects faith
will come to nothing, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the
losers.
6 You who believe, when you are about to pray, wash your faces and
your hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, wash your feet up to
the ankles and, if required, a wash your whole body. If any of you is
sick or on a journey, or has just relieved himself, or had intimate
contact with a woman, and can ﬁnd no water, then take some clean
sand and wipe your face and hands with it. God does not wish to
place any burden on you: He only wishes to cleanse you and perfect
His blessing on you, so that you may be thankful. b 7 Remember
God’s blessing on you and the pledge with which you were bound
when you said, ‘We hear and we obey.’ Be mindful of God: God has
full knowledge of the secrets of the heart.
8 You who believe, be steadfast in your devotion to God and bear
witness impartially: do not let hatred of others c lead you away from
a

e.g. after sexual intercourse or discharging semen.
‘Perfecting the blessing’ is seen in instructing believers to avoid what is unclean in
food and to wash before worship. This is also noted in 4: 43, where there is an instruction to wash before the prayer following an instruction to keep away from the pollution
of the immoral acts mentioned in the preceding verses.
c This resumes the instruction in vv. 1–2.
b

5: 17

The Feast

69

justice, but adhere to justice, for that is closer to awareness of God.
Be mindful of God: God is well aware of all that you do. 9 God has
promised forgiveness and a rich reward to those who have faith and
do good works; 10 those who reject faith and deny Our revelations will
inhabit the blazing Fire.
11 You who believe, remember God’s blessing on you when a
certain people were about to raise their hands against you and He
restrained them. Be mindful of God: let the believers put their trust
in Him.
12 God took a pledge from the Children of Israel. We made
twelve leaders arise among them, and God said, ‘I am with you: if you
keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, believe in My messengers and support them, and lend God a good loan, a I will wipe out
your sins and admit you into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams.
Any of you who now ignore this [pledge] will be far from the right
path.’ 13 But they broke their pledge, so We distanced them [from
Us] and hardened their hearts. They distort the meaning of
[revealed] words and have forgotten some of what they were told
to remember: you [Prophet] will always ﬁnd treachery in all but a
few of them. Overlook this and pardon them: God loves those
who do good. 14 We also took a pledge from those who say, ‘We are
Christians,’ but they too forgot some of what they were told to
remember, so We stirred up enmity and hatred among them until the
Day of Resurrection, when God will tell them what they have done.
15 People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to make clear to
you much of what you have kept hidden of the Scripture, and to
overlook much [you have done]. A light has now come to you from
God, and a Scripture making things clear, 16 with which God guides
to the ways of peace those who follow what pleases Him, bringing
them from darkness out into light, by His will, and guiding them to a
straight path. 17 Those who say, ‘God is the Messiah, the son of
Mary,’ are defying the truth. Say, ‘If it had been God’s will, could
anyone have prevented Him from destroying the Messiah, son of
Mary, together with his mother and everyone else on earth? Control
of the heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs to
God: He creates whatever He will. b God has power over everything.’
a God repays what is given for His sake, many times over. The Qur an uses this ﬁgure
of speech in many instances. See, for example, 57: 18; 64: 17.
b Including his creation of Jesus without a father (3: 47 and 59).

70

The Qur an

5: 18

18 The Jews and the Christians say, ‘We are the children of God and
His beloved ones.’ Say, ‘Then why does He punish you for your
sins? You are merely human beings, part of His creation: He forgives whoever He will and punishes whoever He will. Control of
the heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs to Him:
all journeys lead to Him.’ 19 People of the Book, Our Messenger
comes to you now, after a break in the sequence of messengers, to
make things clear for you in case you should say, ‘No one has come
to give us good news or to warn us.’ So someone has come to you, to
give you good news and warn you: God has the power to do all
things.
20 Moses said to his people, ‘My people, remember God’s blessing
on you: how He raised prophets among you and appointed kings for
you and gave you what he had not given to any other people. 21 My
people, go into the holy land which God has ordained for you–– do
not turn back or you will be the losers.’ 22 They said, ‘Moses, there is
a fearsome people in this land. We will not go there until they leave.
If they leave, then we will enter.’ 23 Yet two men whom God had
blessed among those who were afraid said, ‘Go in to them through
the gate and when you go in you will overcome them. If you are true
believers, put your trust in God.’ 24 They said, ‘Moses, we will never
enter while they are still there, so you and your Lord go in and ﬁght,
and we will stay here.’ 25 He said, ‘Lord, I have authority over no one
except myself and my brother: judge between the two of us and these
disobedient people.’ 26 God said, ‘The land is forbidden to them for
forty years: they will wander the earth aimlessly. Do not grieve over
those who disobey.’
27 [Prophet], tell them the truth about the story of Adam’s two
sons: each of them oﬀered a sacriﬁce, and it was accepted from one
and not the other. One said, ‘I will kill you,’ but the other said, ‘God
only accepts the sacriﬁce of those who are mindful of Him. 28 If you
raise your hand to kill me, I will not raise mine to kill you. I fear
God, the Lord of all worlds, 29 and I would rather you were burdened
with my sins as well as yours and became an inhabitant of the Fire:
such is the evildoers’ reward.’ 30 But his soul prompted him to kill
his brother: he killed him and became one of the losers. 31 God sent
a raven to scratch up the ground and show him how to cover
his brother’s corpse and he said, ‘Woe is me! Could I not have been
like this raven and covered up my brother’s body?’ He became

5: 41

The Feast

71

remorseful. 32 On account of [his deed], We decreed to the Children
of Israel that if anyone kills a person–– unless in retribution for
murder or spreading corruption in the land–– it is as if he kills all
mankind, while if any saves a life it is as if he saves the lives of all
mankind. Our messengers came to them with clear signs, but many
of them continued to commit excesses in the land. 33 Those who
wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to spread corruption in the land should be punished by death, cruciﬁxion, the
amputation of an alternate hand and foot, a or banishment from the
land: a disgrace for them in this world, and then a terrible punishment in the Hereafter, 34 unless they repent before you overpower
them–– in that case bear in mind that God is forgiving and merciful.
35 You who believe, be mindful of God, seek ways to come closer to
Him and strive for His cause, so that you may prosper. 36 If the
disbelievers possessed all that is in the earth and twice as much again
and oﬀered it to ransom themselves from torment on the Day of
Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them–– they will have a
painful torment. 37 They will wish to come out of the Fire but they
will be unable to do so: theirs will be a lasting torment.
38 Cut oﬀ the hands of thieves, whether they are man or woman,
as punishment for what they have done–– a deterrent from God:
God is almighty and wise. 39 But if anyone repents after his wrongdoing and makes amends, God will accept his repentance: God is
most forgiving, most merciful. 40 Do you [Prophet] not know that
control of the heavens and earth belongs solely to God? He punishes
whoever He will and forgives whoever He will: God has power over
everything.
41 Messenger, do not be grieved by those who race to surpass one
another in disbelief–– those who say with their mouths, ‘We believe,’
but have no faith in their hearts, and the Jews who listen eagerly to
lies and to those who have not even met you, who distort the meanings of [revealed] words and say [to each other], ‘If you are given this
ruling, accept it, but if you are not, then beware!’ b ––if God intends
a

Left hand and right foot or vice versa.
According to most interpreters, this refers to a case where an eminent Jewish man
and woman committed adultery. The Jewish community did not want to apply the
biblical penalty of stoning, so they sent representatives to the Prophet to ask for a ruling,
saying, ‘If he orders you to apply lashing accept it, but if he orders stoning, do not accept
it’ (Razi).
b

72

The Qur an

5: 42

some people to be so misguided, you will be powerless against God
on their behalf. These are the ones whose hearts God does not intend
to cleanse–– a disgrace for them in this world, and then a heavy punishment in the Hereafter–– 42 they listen eagerly to lies and consume
what is unlawful. If they come to you [Prophet] for judgement, you
can either judge between them, or decline–– if you decline, they will
not harm you in any way, but if you do judge between them, judge
justly: God loves the just–– 43 but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the Torah with God’s judgement, and even
then still turn away? These are not believers. 44 We revealed the
Torah with guidance and light, and the prophets, who had submitted
to God, judged according to it for the Jews. So did the rabbis and the
scholars in accordance with that part of God’s Scripture which they
were entrusted to preserve, and to which they were witnesses. So
[rabbis and scholars] do not fear people, fear Me; do not barter away
My messages for a small price; those who do not judge according to
what God has sent down are rejecting [God’s teachings]. 45 In the
Torah We prescribed for them a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a
nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, an equal wound
for a wound: if anyone forgoes this out of charity, it will serve as
atonement for his bad deeds. Those who do not judge according to
what God has revealed are doing grave wrong.
46 We sent Jesus, son of Mary, in their footsteps, to conﬁrm the
Torah that had been sent before him: We gave him the Gospel with
guidance, light, and conﬁrmation of the Torah already revealed––
a guide and lesson for those who take heed of God. 47 So let the
followers of the Gospel judge according to what God has sent down
in it. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealed
are lawbreakers.
48 We sent to you [Muhammad] the Scripture with the truth, conﬁrming the Scriptures that came before it, and with ﬁnal authority
over them: so judge between them according to what God has sent
down. Do not follow their whims, which deviate from the truth that
has come to you. We have assigned a law and a path to each of you. If
God had so willed, He would have made you one community, but He
wanted to test you through that which He has given you, so race to
do good: you will all return to God and He will make clear to you the
matters you diﬀered about. 49 So [Prophet] judge between them
according to what God has sent down. Do not follow their whims,

5: 60

The Feast

73

and take good care that they do not tempt you away from any of what
God has sent down to you. If they turn away, remember that God
intends to punish them for some of the sins they have committed:
a great many people are lawbreakers. 50 Do they want judgement
according to the time of pagan ignorance? Is there any better judge
than God for those of ﬁrm faith?
51 You who believe, do not take the Jews and Christians as allies: a
they are allies only to each other. Anyone who takes them as an ally
becomes one of them–– God does not guide such wrongdoers–– 52 yet
you [Prophet] will see the perverse at heart rushing to them for
protection, saying, ‘We are afraid fortune may turn against us.’ But
God may well bring about a triumph or some other event of His own
making: then they will rue the secrets they harboured in their hearts,
53 and the believers will say, ‘Are these the men who swore by God
using their strongest oaths that they were with you?’ All they did was
in vain: they have lost everything.
54 You who believe, if any of you go back on your faith, b God will
soon replace you with people He loves and who love Him, people
who are humble towards the believers, hard on the disbelievers, and
who strive in God’s way without fearing anyone’s reproach. Such is
God’s favour. He grants it to whoever He will. God has endless
bounty and knowledge. 55 Your true allies are God, His Messenger,
and the believers–– those who keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed
alms, and bow down in worship. 56 Those who turn for protection to
God, His Messenger, and the believers [are God’s party]: God’s party
is sure to triumph.
57 You who believe, do not take as allies those who ridicule your
religion and make fun of it–– whether people who were given the
Scripture before you, or disbelievers–– and be mindful of God if you
are true believers. 58 When you make the call to prayer, they ridicule
it and make fun of it: this is because they are people who do not
reason. 59 Say [Prophet], ‘People of the Book, do you resent us for
any reason other than the fact that we believe in God, in what has
been sent down to us, and in what was sent before us, while most of
you are disobedient?’ 60 Say, ‘Shall I tell you who deserves a worse
punishment from God than [the one you wish upon] us? Those God
a i.e. those who are against the Muslim camp, as is clear from the following verses,
up to 59. ‘Do not turn to them as allies in preference to the Muslims’ (see 4: 144).
b What is intended in this context is ‘by taking them as allies’.

74

The Qur an

5: 61

distanced from Himself, was angry with, and condemned as apes and
pigs, a and those who worship idols: they are worse in rank and have
strayed further from the right path.
61 When they come to you [believers], they say, ‘We believe,’ but
they come disbelieving and leave disbelieving–– God knows best
what they are hiding. 62 You [Prophet] see many of them rushing into
sin and hostility and consuming what is unlawful. How evil their
practices are! 63 Why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them to
speak sinfully and consume what is unlawful? How evil their
deeds are! 64 The Jews have said, ‘God is tight-ﬁsted,’ but it is they
who are tight-ﬁsted, and they are rejected for what they have said.
Truly, God’s hands are open wide: He gives as He pleases. What has
been sent down to you from your Lord is sure to increase insolence
and deﬁance in many of them. We have sown enmity and hatred
amongst them till the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindle
the ﬁre of war, God will put it out. They try to spread corruption in
the land, but God does not love those who corrupt. 65 If only the
People of the Book would believe and be mindful of God, We would
take away their sins and bring them into the Gardens of Delight. 66 If
they had upheld the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down
to them from their Lord, they would have been given abundance
from above and from below: some of them are on the right course,
but many of them do evil.
67 Messenger, proclaim everything that has been sent down to you
from your Lord–– if you do not, then you will not have communicated
His message–– and God will protect you from people. God does not
guide those who defy Him. 68 Say, ‘People of the Book, you have no
true basis [for your religion] unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel,
and that which has been sent down to you from your Lord,’ but what
has been sent down to you [Prophet] from your Lord is sure to
increase many of them in their insolence and deﬁance: do not worry
about those who defy [God]. 69 For the [Muslim] believers, the Jews,
the Sabians, b and the Christians–– those who believe in God and the
Last Day and do good deeds–– there is no fear: they will not grieve.
70 We took a pledge from the Children of Israel, and sent
a Tabari (in his commentary on 2: 65) regards this as metaphorical in the sense of ‘like
apes, pigs’. Compare the metaphorical use of ‘blind, deaf, dumb’–– 2: 18; 5: 71; 8: 22;
43: 40; etc.
b See note to 2: 62.

5: 82

The Feast

75

messengers to them. Whenever a messenger brought them anything
they did not like, they accused some of lying and put others to death;
71 they thought no harm could come to them and so became blind and
deaf [to God]. God turned to them in mercy but many of them again
became blind and deaf: God is fully aware of their actions. 72 Those
who say, ‘God is the Messiah, son of Mary,’ have deﬁed God. The
Messiah himself said, ‘Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord
and your Lord.’ If anyone associates others with God, God will
forbid him from the Garden, and Hell will be his home. No one will
help such evildoers.
73 Those people who say that God is the third of three are defying
[the truth]: there is only One God. If they persist in what they are
saying, a painful punishment will aﬄict those of them who persist.
74 Why do they not turn to God and ask His forgiveness,
when God is most forgiving, most merciful? 75 The Messiah, son of
Mary, was only a messenger; other messengers had come and gone
before him; his mother was a virtuous woman; both ate food [like
other mortals]. See how clear We make these signs for them; see
how deluded they are. 76 Say, ‘How can you worship something
other than God, that has no power to do you harm or good? God
alone is the All Hearing and All Knowing.’ 77 Say, ‘People of the
Book, do not overstep the bounds of truth in your religion and do
not follow the whims of those who went astray before you–– they
led many others astray and themselves continue to stray from the
even path.’
78 Those Children of Israel who deﬁed [God] were rejected
through the words of David, and Jesus, son of Mary, because they
disobeyed, they persistently overstepped the limits, 79 they did not
forbid each other to do wrong. How vile their deeds were! 80 You
[Prophet] see many of them allying themselves with the disbelievers.
How terrible is what their souls have stored up for them: God is
angry with them and they will remain tormented. 81 If they had
believed in God, in the Prophet, and in what was sent down to him,
they would never have allied themselves with the disbelievers, but
most of them are rebels.
82 You [Prophet] are sure to ﬁnd that the most hostile to the believers
are the Jews and those who associate other deities with God; you are
sure to ﬁnd that the closest in aﬀection towards the believers are those
who say, ‘We are Christians,’ for there are among them people devoted

76

The Qur an

5: 83

to learning and ascetics. a These people are not given to arrogance,
83 and when they listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger,
you will see their eyes overﬂowing with tears because they recognize
the Truth [in it]. They say, ‘Our Lord, we believe, so count us amongst
the witnesses. 84 Why should we not believe in God and in the Truth
that has come down to us, when we long for our Lord to include us
in the company of the righteous?’ 85 For saying this, God has rewarded
them with Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and there they
will stay: that is the reward of those who do good. 86 Those who reject
the truth and deny Our messages will be the inhabitants of Hellﬁre.
87 You who believe, do not forbid the good things God has made
lawful to you–– do not exceed the limits: God does not love those who
exceed the limits–– 88 but eat the lawful and good things that God provides for you. Be mindful of God, in whom you believe. 89 God does not
take you [to task] for what is thoughtless in your oaths, b only for your
binding oaths: the atonement for breaking an oath is to feed ten poor
people with food equivalent to what you would normally give your own
families, or to clothe them, or to set free a slave–– if a person cannot ﬁnd
the means, he should fast for three days. This is the atonement for
breaking your oaths–– keep your oaths. In this way God makes clear
His revelations to you, so that you may be thankful.
90 You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices,
and [divining with] c arrows are repugnant acts–– Satan’s doing––
shun them so that you may prosper. 91 With intoxicants and gambling, Satan seeks only to incite enmity and hatred among you, and
to stop you remembering God and prayer. Will you not give them
up? 92 Obey God, obey the Messenger, and always be on your guard:
if you pay no heed, bear in mind that the sole duty of Our Messenger
is to deliver the message clearly. 93 Those who believe and do good
deeds will not be blamed for what they may have consumed [in the
past] d as long as they are mindful of God, believe and do good deeds,
a Most translators render these as ‘priests and monks’, which are their modern
meanings, not the etymological senses of the words (al-Raghib, Mufradat ).
b Some Muslims swore to renounce the world and not to eat certain good foods or
wear ﬁne clothes, and when told this was wrong, they asked the Prophet what they could
do about their oaths.
c See note to verse 3 above.
d It was reported that when wine was forbidden, some companions asked the Prophet,
‘What about those believers who used to drink and have already died? What state would
they be in?’ This is the reply to that question, and it also applies to the living.

5: 101

The Feast

77

then are mindful of God and believe, then are mindful of God and
do good deeds: God loves those who do good deeds.
94 You who believe, God is sure to test you with game within reach
of your hands and spears, to ﬁnd out who fears Him even though
they cannot see Him: from now on, anyone who transgresses will
have a painful punishment. a 95 You who believe, do not kill game
while you are in the state of consecration [for pilgrimage]. If someone does so intentionally the penalty is an oﬀering of a domestic
animal brought to the Ka ba, equivalent–– as judged by two just men
among you–– to the one he has killed; alternatively, he may atone by
feeding the needy or by fasting an equivalent number of days, so that
he may taste the full gravity of his deed. God forgives what is
past, but if anyone re-oﬀends, God will exact the penalty from him:
God is mighty, and capable of exacting the penalty. 96 It is permitted
for you to catch and eat seafood–– an enjoyment for you and the
traveller–– but hunting game is forbidden while you are in the state
of consecration [for pilgrimage]. Be mindful of God to whom you
will be gathered.
97 God has made the Ka ba–– the Sacred House–– a means of
support for people, b and the Sacred Months, the animals for sacriﬁce
and their garlands: all this. Know that God has knowledge of all that
is in the heavens and earth and that He is fully aware of all things.
98 Know too that God is severe in punishment yet most forgiving and
merciful. c 99 The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver the message:
God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
100 Say [Prophet], ‘Bad cannot be likened to good, though you may
be dazzled by how abundant the bad is. Be mindful of God, people of
understanding, so that you may prosper.’ 101 You who believe, do not
ask about matters which, if made known to you, might make things
diﬃcult for you–– if you ask about them while the Qur an is being
revealed, they will be made known to you–– for God has kept silent
a

In the world to come.
The Ka ba is the centre of the pilgrimage, bringing in people from all over the
world, where Muslims are allowed to trade–– the Sacred Months ensured their safety.
The oﬀerings provide a means of livelihood to the poor and needy, and the custom of
garlanding an animal gives it special protection. In addition to all these material beneﬁts,
there are the spiritual beneﬁts of worshipping God. This is an example of bringing
people together in peace (Razi).
c This is a warning for those who violate these rites and refers back to verse 2 of this
sura.
b

78

The Qur an

5: 102

about them: God is most forgiving and forbearing. 102 Before you,
some people asked about things, then ignored [the answers]. 103 God
did not institute the dedication of such things as bahira, sa iba,
wasila, or ham a to idols; but the disbelievers invent lies about God.
Most of them do not use reason: 104 when it is said to them, ‘Come
to what God has sent down, and to the Messenger,’ they say, ‘What
we inherited from our forefathers is good enough for us,’ even
though their forefathers knew nothing and were not guided. 105 You
who believe, you are responsible for your own souls; if anyone else
goes astray it will not harm you so long as you follow the guidance;
you will all return to God, and He will make you realize what you
have done.
106 You who believe, when death approaches any of you, let two
just men from among you act as witnesses to the making of a
bequest, or two men from another people if you are journeying in the
land when death approaches. Keep the two witnesses back after
prayer, if you have any doubts, and make them both swear by God,
‘We will not sell our testimony for any price, even if a close relative is
involved. We will not hide God’s testimony, for then we should be
doing wrong.’ 107 If it is discovered that these two are guilty [of perjury], two of those whose rights have been usurped have a better right
to bear witness in their place. Let them swear by God, ‘Our testimony is truer than theirs. We have said nothing but the truth, for
that would make us wrongdoers’: 108 that will make it more likely
they will give true and proper testimony, or fear that their oaths
might be refuted by others afterwards. Be mindful of God and listen;
God does not guide those who break His laws.
109 On the Day when God assembles all the messengers b and asks,
‘What response did you receive?’ they will say, ‘We do not have that
knowledge: You alone know things that cannot be seen.’ 110 Then
God will say, ‘Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favour to you and
to your mother: how I strengthened you with the holy spirit, so that
a Diﬀerent classes of animals liberated from work or use as food, in honour of idols,
and venerated by the pagan Arabs.
b As Razi rightly stated, it is the habit of the Qur an, having talked at length on
legislation, to follow it with reminders of God’s power, stories of earlier prophets, or
what happens on the Day of Judgement, in order to motivate people to adhere to the
legislation. In this sura, having earlier mentioned the claims of Christians, it seeks
further to refute them by showing that Jesus will disown their claims on the Day of
Judgement.

5: 120

The Feast

79

you spoke to people in your infancy and as a grown man; how I
taught you the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel;
how, by My leave, you fashioned the shape of a bird out of clay,
breathed into it, and it became, by My leave, a bird; how, by My
leave, you healed the blind person and the leper; how, by My leave,
you brought the dead back to life; how I restrained the Children of
Israel from [harming] you when you brought them clear signs, and
those of them who disbelieved said, “This is clearly nothing but
sorcery”; 111 and how I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and
My messengers–– they said, “We believe and bear witness that we
devote ourselves [to God].”’ a
112 When the disciples said, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord
send down a feast to us from heaven?’ he said, ‘Beware of God if you
are true believers.’ 113 They said, ‘We wish to eat from it; to have our
hearts reassured; to know that you have told us the truth; and to be
witnesses of it.’ 114 Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Lord, send down to us a
feast from heaven so that we can have a festival–– the ﬁrst and last of
us–– and a sign from You. Provide for us: You are the best provider.’
115 God said, ‘I will send it down to you, but anyone who disbelieves
after this will be punished with a punishment that I will not inﬂict on
anyone else in the world.’
116 When God says, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, did you say to people,
“Take me and my mother as two gods alongside God”?’ he will say,
‘May You be exalted! I would never say what I had no right to say––
if I had said such a thing You would have known it: You know all that
is within me, though I do not know what is within You, You alone
have full knowledge of things unseen–– 117 I told them only what You
commanded me to: “Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.” I was a
witness over them during my time among them. Ever since You took
my soul, You alone have been the watcher over them: You are witness
to all things 118 and if You punish them, they are Your servants; if You
forgive them, You are the Almighty, the Wise.’ 119 God will say, ‘This
is a Day when the truthful will beneﬁt from their truthfulness.
They will have Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, there to
remain for ever. God is pleased with them and they with Him: that is
the supreme triumph.’ 120 Control of the heavens and earth and
everything in them belongs to God: He has power over all things.
a

Cf. 2: 131–3.

6. LIVESTOCK
A Meccan sura which takes its title from verses 136–9. The false claims the
polytheists made about livestock are thoroughly addressed: the sura in its
entirety makes plain that it is God who creates, controls, and sees everything,
and that it is to Him that we turn in times of need. Thus it gives a lengthy
refutation of the idolaters’ claims.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Praise belongs to God who created the heavens and the earth and
made darkness and light; yet the disbelievers set up equals to their
Lord! 2 He is the one who created you from clay and speciﬁed a term
[for you] and another ﬁxed time, a known only to Him; yet still you
doubt! 3 He is God in the heavens and on earth, He knows your
secrets and what you reveal, and He knows what you do; 4 but every
time revelation comes to them from their Lord, they turn their backs
on it. 5 So they denied the truth when it came to them, but the very
thing they laughed at will be brought home to them.
6 Do they not realize how many generations We destroyed before
them? We established them in the earth more ﬁrmly than you, sent
down abundant rain on them from the sky and made running rivers
ﬂow at their feet, yet We destroyed them for their misdeeds and
raised other generations after them. 7 Even if We had sent down to
you [Prophet] a book inscribed on parchment, and they had touched
it with their own hands, the disbelievers would still say, ‘This is
nothing but blatant sorcery.’ 8 They say, ‘Why was no angel sent
down to [support] him?’ b But had We sent down an angel, their
judgement would have come at once with no respite given. 9 Indeed,
if We had sent an angel as messenger, We would still have sent him in
the form of a man, so increasing their confusion.
10 Messengers have been mocked before you [Muhammad], and
those who mocked them were engulfed by the very punishment they
had mocked. 11 Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth and see what fate
a

These refer to the speciﬁed lifetime of individuals and the Day of Judgement.
They always argued against the Prophet that he was only a man, and asked him to
produce an angel to support him. Cf. 25: 7.
b

6: 27

Livestock

81

befell those who rejected the truth.’ 12 Say, ‘To whom belongs all that
is in the heavens and earth?’ Say, ‘To God. He has taken it upon
Himself to be merciful. He will certainly gather you on the Day of
Resurrection, which is beyond all doubt. Those who deceive themselves will not believe. 13 All that rests by night or by day belongs to
Him. He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’ 14 Say, ‘Shall I take for
myself a protector other than God, the Creator of the heavens and
the earth, who feeds but is not fed?’ Say, ‘I am commanded to be the
ﬁrst [of you] to devote myself [to Him].’ Do not be one of the
idolaters. 15 Say, ‘I fear the punishment of a dreadful Day if I
disobey my Lord. 16 God will have been truly merciful to whoever is
spared on that Day: that is the clearest triumph.’
17 If God touches you [Prophet] with aﬄiction, no one can remove
it except Him, and if He touches you with good, He has power over
all things: 18 He is the Supreme Master over His creatures, the All
Wise, the All Aware. 19 Say, ‘What counts most as a witness?’ Say,
‘God is witness between you and me. This Qur an was revealed for
me to warn you [people] and everyone it reaches. Do you really bear
witness that there are other gods beside God?’ Say, ‘I myself do not
bear witness [to any such thing].’ Say, ‘He is only one God, and I
disown whatever you join with Him.’ 20 Those to whom We have
given the Scripture know this as well as they know their own sons.
Those who have lost their souls will not believe. 21 Who does greater
wrong than someone who fabricates a lie against God or denies His
revelation? Those who do such wrong will not prosper. 22 When We
gather them all together and say to the polytheists, ‘Where are those
you claimed were partners with God?’ in their utter dismay 23 they
will only say, ‘By God, our Lord, we have not set up partners beside
Him!’ 24 See how they lie against themselves and how those they
invented have deserted them.
25 Among them are some who [appear to] listen to you, but we have
placed covers over their hearts–– so they do not understand the
Qur an–– and deafness in their ears. Even if they saw every sign they
would not believe in them. So, when they come to you, they argue
with you: the disbelievers say, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables,’
26 and tell others not to listen [to the Qur an], while they themselves
keep away from it. But they ruin no one but themselves, though
they fail to realize this. 27 If you could only see, when they are made
to stand before the Fire, how they will say, ‘If only we could be

82

The Qur an

6: 28

sent back, we would not reject the revelations of our Lord, but be
among the believers.’ 28 No! The truth they used to hide will become all
too clear to them. Even if they were brought back, they would only
return to the very thing that was forbidden to them–– they are such
liars! 29 They say, ‘There is nothing beyond our life in this world: we
shall not be raised from the dead.’ 30 If you could only see, when they
are made to stand before their Lord, how He will say, ‘Is this not
real?’ They will say, ‘Yes indeed, by our Lord.’ He will say, ‘Then
taste the torment for having disbelieved.’ 31 Lost indeed are those
who deny the meeting with their Lord until, when the Hour suddenly arrives, they say, ‘Alas for us that we disregarded this!’ They
will bear their burdens on their backs. How terrible those burdens
will be! 32 The life of this world is nothing but a game and a distraction; the Home in the Hereafter is best for those who are aware of
God. Why will you [people] not understand?
33 We know well that what they say grieves you [Prophet]. It is not
you they disbelieve: the evildoers reject God’s revelation. 34 Other
messengers were disbelieved before you, and they bore their rejection and persecution steadfastly until Our aid arrived–– no one can
alter God’s promises. You have already received accounts of these
messengers. 35 If you ﬁnd rejection by the disbelievers so hard to
bear, then seek a tunnel into the ground or a ladder into the sky,
if you can, and bring them a sign: God could bring them all to
guidance if it were His will, so do not join the ignorant. 36 Only those
who can hear will respond; as for the dead, God will raise them up,
and to Him they will all be returned.
37 They also say, ‘Why has no sign been sent down to him from his
Lord?’ Say, ‘God certainly has the power to send down a sign,’
though most of them do not know: 38 all the creatures that crawl on
the earth and those that ﬂy with their wings are communities like
yourselves. We have missed nothing out of the Record–– in the end
they will be gathered to their Lord. 39 Those who reject Our signs are
deaf, dumb, and in total darkness. God leaves whoever He will to
stray, and sets whoever He will on a straight path. 40 Say, ‘Think: if
the punishment of God or the Hour should come to you, would you
call on anyone other than God, if you are being truthful?’ 41 No
indeed, it is on Him that you would call. If it were His will, He could
remove whatever harm made you call on Him, and then you would
forget what you now associate with Him.

6: 54

Livestock

83

42 We sent messengers before you [Prophet] to many communities
and aﬄicted their people with suﬀering and hardships, so that they
could learn humility. 43 If only they had learned humility when
suﬀering came from Us! But no, their hearts became hard and
Satan made their foul deeds alluring to them. 44 So, when they had
forgotten the warning they had received, We opened the gates to
everything for them. Then, as they revelled in what they had
been given, We struck them suddenly and they were dumbfounded.
45The evildoers were wiped out: praise be to God, the Lord of the
Worlds!
46 Say [Prophet], ‘Think: if God were to take away your hearing and
your sight and seal up your hearts, what god other than He could
restore them?’ See how We explain Our revelations in various ways,
yet still they turn away. 47 Say, ‘Think: if the punishment of God
should come to you, by surprise or openly, would anyone but the
evildoers be destroyed?’ 48 We send messengers only to give good news
and to warn, so for those who believe and do good deeds there will be
no fear, nor will they grieve. 49 As for those who rejected Our signs,
torment will aﬄict them as a result of their deﬁance. 50 Say, ‘I do not
have the treasures of God, nor do I know the unseen, nor do I tell you
that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me.’ Say, ‘Is a blind
person like one who can see? Why will you not reﬂect?’
51 Use the Qur an to warn those who fear being gathered before
their Lord–– they will have no one but Him to protect them and no
one to intercede–– so that they may beware. 52 Do not drive away
those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking nothing but His Face. a You are in no way accountable for them, nor they
for you; if you drove the believers away, b you would become one of
the evildoers. 53 We have made some of them a test for others, to
make the disbelievers say, ‘Is it these men that God has favoured
among us?’ Does God not know best who are the grateful ones?
54 When those who believe in Our revelations come to you
[Prophet], say, ‘Peace be upon you. Your Lord has taken it on
a ‘His pleasure/approval’, or ‘to see His face’ (see ‘The Face, Divine and Human in
the Qur an’, in Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an, 107–22); see also 92: 19–21.
b Cf. 80: 1. The Prophet was torn between his eﬀorts to win over the nobles to save
them, and the humble believers, whom the nobles wanted him to get rid of, claiming that
they only congregated around him to gain prestige or material beneﬁts. The Prophet
here is told that he should not worry about them and so become a wrongdoer by driving
away true believers.

84

The Qur an

6: 55

Himself to be merciful: if any of you has foolishly done a bad
deed, and afterwards repented and mended his ways, God is most
forgiving and most merciful.’ 55 In this way We explain the revelations, so that the way for sinners may be made clear. a 56 Say, ‘I am
forbidden to worship those you call on other than God.’ Say, ‘I will
not follow your vain desires, for if I did, I would stray from the path
and cease to be rightly guided.’ 57 Say, ‘I stand on clear proof from
my Lord, though you deny it. What you seek to hasten is not within
my power. Judgement is for God alone: He tells the truth, and He is
the best of judges.’ 58 Say, ‘If what you seek to hasten were within my
power, the matter would be settled between you and me, but God
knows best who does wrong.’ 59 He has the keys to the unseen: no one
knows them but Him. He knows all that is in the land and sea. No
leaf falls without His knowledge, nor is there a single grain in the
darkness of the earth, or anything, fresh or withered, that is not
written in a clear Record. 60 It is He who calls your souls back by
night, knowing what you have done by day, then raises you up again
in the daytime until your ﬁxed term is fulﬁlled. It is to Him that you
will return in the end, and He will tell you what you have done. 61 He
is the Supreme Master over His subjects. He sends out recorders to
watch over you until, when death overtakes any of you, those sent by
Us take his soul–– they never fail in their duty. 62 Then they will all be
returned to God, their true Lord. The Judgement truly belongs to
Him, and He is the swiftest of reckoners.
63 Say [Prophet], ‘Who is it that saves you from the dark depths of
land and sea when you humbly and secretly call to Him [and say], “If
He rescues us from this, We shall truly be thankful”?’ 64 Say, ‘God
rescues you from this and every distress; yet still you worship others
beside Him.’ 65 Say, ‘He has power to send punishment on you from
above or from under your very feet, or to divide you into discordant
factions and make some taste the violence of others.’ See how We
explain Our revelation in various ways, so that they may understand,
66 yet your people still reject it even though it is the truth. Say, ‘I have
not been put in charge of you. 67 Every prophecy has its ﬁxed time to
be fulﬁlled: you will come to realize this.’
68 When you come across people who speak with scorn about Our
a Another interpretation of this verse is that the way of the sinners is hereby made
distinct from the way of the righteous.

6: 79

Livestock

85

revelations, turn away from them until they move on to another
topic. If Satan should make you forget, then, when you have remembered, do not sit with those who are doing wrong. 69 The righteous
are not in any way held accountable for the wrongdoers; their only
duty is to remind them, so that they may be mindful of God. 70 Leave
to themselves those who take their religion for a mere game and
distraction and are deceived by the life of this world, but continue to
remind them with the [Qur an], lest any soul be damned by what it
has done–– it will have no one to protect it from God and no one to
intercede; whatever ransom it may oﬀer will not be accepted. Such
are those who are damned by their own actions: they will have boiling water to drink and a painful punishment, because they used to
defy [God].
71 Say, ‘Instead of God, are we to call on what neither proﬁts nor
harms us? [Are we to] turn on our heels after God has guided us, like
someone bewildered, having been tempted by devils into a desert
ravine, a though his companions call him to guidance [saying], “Come
to us”?’ Say, ‘God’s guidance is the true guidance. We are commanded
to devote ourselves to the Lord of the Worlds, 72 to establish regular
prayers and be mindful of Him.’ It is to Him that you will all be
gathered. 73 It is He who created the heavens and the earth for a true
purpose. On the Day when He says, ‘Be,’ it will be: His word is the
truth. All control on the Day the Trumpet is blown belongs to Him.
He knows the seen and the unseen: He is the All Wise, the All Aware.
74 Remember when Abraham said to his father, Azar, ‘How can you
take idols as gods? I see that you and your people have clearly gone
astray.’ 75 In this way We showed Abraham [God’s] mighty dominion
over the heavens and the earth, so that he might be a ﬁrm believer.
76 When the night grew dark over him he saw a star and said, ‘This is
my Lord,’ but when it set, he said, ‘I do not like things that set.’
77 And when he saw the moon rising he said, ‘This is my Lord,’ but
when it too set, he said, ‘If my Lord does not guide me, I shall be
one of those who go astray.’ 78 Then he saw the sun rising and cried,
‘This is my Lord! This is greater.’ But when the sun set, he said,
‘My people, I disown all that you worship beside God. 79 I have
turned my face as a true believer towards Him who created the
heavens and the earth. I am not one of the polytheists.’
a

This interpretation of the literal ‘in the land’ is preferred by Razi.

86

The Qur an

6: 80

80 His people argued with him, and he said, ‘How can you argue
with me about God when He has guided me? I do not fear anything
you associate with Him: unless my Lord wills [nothing can happen].
My Lord encompasses everything in His knowledge. How can you
not take heed? 81 Why should I fear what you associate with Him?
Why do you not fear to associate with Him things for which He has
sent you no authority? Tell me, if you know the answer, which side
has more right to feel secure? 82 It is those who have faith, and do not
mix their faith with idolatry, a who will be secure, and it is they who
are rightly guided.’ 83 Such was the argument We gave to Abraham
against his people–– We raise in rank whoever We will–– your Lord is
all wise, all knowing.
84 We gave him Isaac and Jacob, each of whom We guided, as We
had guided Noah before, and among his descendants were David,
Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron–– in this way We reward
those who do good–– 85 Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elijah–– every
one of them was righteous–– 86 Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot. We
favoured each one of them over other people, 87 and also some of
their forefathers, their oﬀspring, and their brothers: We chose them
and guided them on a straight path. 88 Such is God’s guidance, with
which He guides whichever of His servants He will. If they had
associated other gods with Him, all their deeds would have come to
nothing. 89 Those are the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood. Even if these people now disbelieve in them,
We have entrusted them to others who do not disbelieve. 90 Those
were the people God guided, ‘[Prophet], follow the guidance they
received.’ Say, ‘I ask no reward for it from you: it is a lesson for all
people.’
91 They have no grasp of God’s true measure when they say, ‘God
has sent nothing down to a mere mortal.’ Say, ‘Who was it who sent
down the Scripture, which Moses brought as a light and a guide to
people, which you made into separate sheets, showing some but
hiding many? You were taught things that neither you nor your
forefathers had known.’ Say, ‘God [sent it down],’ then leave them
engrossed in their vain talk. 92 This is a blessed Scripture that We
have sent down to conﬁrm what came before it and for you to warn
a The Prophet explained zulm (evildoing) here to be shirk (idolatry), referring to
31: 13.

6: 100

Livestock

87

the Mother of Cities a and all around it. Those who believe in the
Hereafter believe in this Scripture, and do not neglect their prayers.
93 Who could be more wicked than someone who invents a lie
against God, or claims, ‘A revelation has come to me,’ when no
revelation has been sent to him, or says, ‘I too can reveal something
equal to God’s revelation’? If you could only see the wicked in their
death agonies, as the angels stretch out their hands [to them],
saying, ‘Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with a
humiliating punishment for saying false things about God and
for arrogantly rejecting His revelations.’ 94 [God will say], ‘Now
you return to Us, alone, as We ﬁrst created you: you have left
behind everything We gave you, nor do We see those intercessors
of yours that you claimed were partners of God. All the bonds
between you have been severed, and those about whom you made
such claims have deserted you.’
95 It is God who splits open the seed and the fruit stone: He brings
out the living from the dead and the dead from the living–– that is
God–– so how can you turn away from the truth? 96 He makes the
dawn break; He makes the night for rest; and He made the sun and
the moon to a precise measure. That is the design of the Almighty,
the All Knowing. 97 It is He who made the stars, so that they can
guide you when land and sea are dark: We have made the signs clear
for those who have knowledge. 98 It is He who ﬁrst produced you
from a single soul, then gave you a place to stay [in life] and a resting
place [after death]. We have made Our revelations clear to those who
understand. 99 It is He who sends down water from the sky. With it
We produce the shoots of each plant, then bring greenery from
it, and from that We bring out grains, one riding on the other in
close-packed rows.
From the date palm come clusters of low-hanging dates, and there
are gardens of vines, olives, and pomegranates, alike yet diﬀerent.
Watch their fruits as they grow and ripen! In all this there are signs
for those who would believe. 100 Yet they made the jinn b partners
with God, though He created them, and without any true knowledge
they attribute sons and daughters to Him. Glory be to Him! He is far
a

Mecca.
Unseen beings (sometimes said to appear) made from ‘smokeless ﬁre’ (see 38: 76;
55: 15).
b

88

The Qur an

6: 101

higher than what they ascribe to Him, 101 the Creator of the heavens
and earth! How could He have children when He has no spouse,
when He created all things, and has full knowledge of all things?
102 This is God, your Lord, there is no God but Him, the Creator of
all things, so worship Him; He is in charge of everything. 103 No
vision can take Him in, but He takes in all vision. a He is the All
Subtle, the All Aware.
104 Now clear proof has come to you from your Lord: if anyone
sees it, that will be to his advantage; if anyone is blind to it, that will
be to his loss–– [Say], ‘I am not your guardian.’ 105 This is how We
explain Our revelations in various ways–– though b they will say,
‘You [Muhammad] have been studying’–– to make them clear for
those who know. 106 Follow what has been revealed to you from your
Lord, there is no God but Him. Turn away from those who join
other gods with Him. 107 If it had been God’s will, they would not
have done so, but We have not made you their guardian, nor are you
their keeper.
108 [Believers], do not revile those they call on beside God in case
they, in their hostility and ignorance, revile God. To each community We make their own actions seem alluring, but in the end they
will return to their Lord and He will inform them of all they did.
109 They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that if a miraculous sign came to them they would believe in it. Say [Prophet],
‘Signs are in the power of God alone.’ What will make you
[believers] realize that even if a sign came to them they still would
not believe? 110 We would make their hearts and their eyes turn away,
just as they did not believe the ﬁrst time, and leave them to ﬂounder
in their obstinacy. 111 Even if We sent the angels down to them, and
the dead spoke to them, and We gathered all things right in front of
them, they still would not believe, unless God so willed, but most of
them are ignorant [of this]. 112 In the same way We assigned to each
prophet an enemy, evil humans and evil jinn. They suggest alluring
words to one another in order to deceive–– if it had been your Lord’s
will, [Prophet], they would not have done this: leave them to their
inventions–– 113 so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the
a No human eye is able to see God, but God sees everything we see: this is another
illustration of our powerlessness compared with Him.
b See Razi; the preposition li in Arabic here indicates result rather than purpose.

6: 125

Livestock

89

Hereafter may incline towards their deceit, be pleased with it, and so
perpetrate whatever they perpetrate.
114 [Say], ‘Shall I seek any judge other than God, when it is He
who has sent down for you [people] the Scripture, clearly
explained?’ Those to whom We gave the Scripture know that this
[Qur an] is revealed by your Lord [Prophet] with the truth, so do not
be one of those who doubt. 115 The word of your Lord is complete in
its truth and justice. No one can change His words: He is the All
Hearing, the All Knowing. 116 If you obeyed most of those on earth,
they would lead you away from the path of God. They follow nothing but speculation; they are merely guessing. 117 Your Lord knows
best who strays from His path and who is rightly guided.
118 So [believers] eat any [animal] over which God’s name has been
pronounced, if you believe in His revelations. 119 Why should you
not eat such animals when God has already fully explained what He
has forbidden you, except when forced by hunger? But many lead
others astray by their desires, without any true knowledge: your
Lord knows best who oversteps the limit. 120 Avoid committing sin,
whether openly or in secret, for those who commit sin will be repaid
for what they do, 121 and do not eat anything over which God’s name
has not been pronounced, for that is breaking the law.
The evil ones incite their followers to argue with you: a if you
listen to them, you too will become idolaters. 122 Is a dead person
brought back to life by Us, and given light with which to walk among
people, comparable to someone trapped in deep darkness who cannot
escape? In this way the evil deeds of the disbelievers are made
to seem alluring to them. 123 And so We have put chief evildoers in
every city to perpetrate their schemes there–– but they scheme only
against themselves, without realizing it. 124 When a revelation is
brought before them they say, ‘We shall not believe unless we ourselves are given a revelation as God’s messengers were.’ But God
knows best where to place His messages: humiliation before God and
severe torment will befall the evildoers for their scheming. 125 When
God wishes to guide someone, He opens their breast to islam; b when
He wishes to lead them astray, He closes and constricts their breast
as if they were climbing up to the skies. That is how God makes the
foulness of those who do not believe rebound against them.
a
b

Saying that nothing is wrong with meat sacriﬁced to an idol.
Devotion to God (see 2: 131–2).

90

The Qur an

6: 126

126 [Prophet], this is the path of your Lord, made perfectly
straight. We have explained Our revelations to those who take heed.
127 They shall have the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He will
take care of them as a reward for their deeds.
128 On the day He gathers everyone together [saying], ‘Company
of jinn! You have seduced a great many humans,’ their adherents
among mankind will say, ‘Lord, we have proﬁted from one another,
but now we have reached the appointed time You decreed for us.’
He will say, ‘Your home is the Fire, and there you shall remain’––
unless God wills otherwise: [Prophet], your Lord is all wise, all
knowing. 129 In this way, We make some evildoers have power over
others through their misdeeds. 130 ‘Company of jinn and mankind!
Did messengers not come from among you to recite My revelations
to you and warn that you would meet this Day?’ They will say, ‘We
testify against ourselves.’ The life of this world seduced them, but
they will testify against themselves that they rejected the truth:
131 your Lord would not destroy towns for their wrongdoing if they
had not been warned. 132 Everyone is assigned a rank according to
their deeds; your Lord is not unaware of anything they do. 133 Your
Lord is self-suﬃcient and full of mercy. If He pleased, He could
remove you and put others in your place, just as He produced you
from the oﬀspring of other people. 134 What you are promised is sure
to come, and you cannot escape. 135 [Prophet], say, ‘My people, you
carry on as you are, and so will I: you will come to realize who will
have a happy homecoming in the Hereafter.’ The evildoers will not
prosper.
136 They apportion to God a share of the produce and the livestock
He created, saying, ‘This is for God’–– so they claim!––‘ and this is
for our idols.’ Their idols’ share does not reach God, but God’s share
does reach their idols: how badly they judge! 137 In the same way,
their idols have induced many of the pagans to kill their own children, a bringing them ruin and confusion in their faith: if God had
willed otherwise they would not have done this, so [Prophet] leave
them to their own devices. 138 They also say, ‘These cattle and crops
are reserved, and only those we allow may eat them’–– so they claim!
There are some animals they exempt from labour and some over
a Razi explains that either the jinn or servants of the idols appointed by the pagans
suggested this infanticide.

6: 147

Livestock

91

which they do not pronounce God’s name [during slaughter], falsely
attributing these [regulations] to Him: He will repay them for the
falsehoods they invent. 139 They also say, ‘The contents of these animals’ wombs will be reserved solely for our men and forbidden to
our women, though if the oﬀspring is stillborn they may have a share
of it.’ He will punish them for what they attribute to Him: He is all
wise, all aware. 140 Lost indeed are those who kill their own children
out of folly, with no basis in knowledge, a forbidding what God has
provided for them, fabricating lies against Him: they have gone far
astray and have heeded no guidance.
141 It is He who produces both trellised and untrellised gardens,
date palms, crops of diverse ﬂavours, the olive, the pomegranate,
alike yet diﬀerent. So when they bear fruit, eat some of it, paying
what is due on the day of harvest, but do not be wasteful: God does
not like wasteful people. 142 [He gave you] livestock, as beasts of
burden and as food. So eat what God has provided for you and do
not follow in Satan’s footsteps: he is your sworn enemy. 143 [God gave
you] eight animals, in [four] pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair of
goats–– ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden the two males, the
two females, or the young in the wombs of the two females? Tell me
based on knowledge if you are telling the truth.’ 144 And a pair of
camels and a pair of cattle–– ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden
the two males, the two females, or the young in the wombs of the two
females? Were you present when God gave you these commands?’ So
who is more wicked than he who fabricates lies against God with no
basis in knowledge in order to lead people astray? God does not
guide the evildoers.
145 [Prophet], say, ‘In all that has been revealed to me, I ﬁnd nothing forbidden for people to eat, except for carrion, ﬂowing blood,
pig’s meat–– it is loathsome–– or a sinful oﬀering over which any
name other than God’s has been invoked.’ But if someone is forced
by hunger, rather than desire or excess, then God is most forgiving
and most merciful. 146 We forbade for the Jews every animal with
claws, and the fat of cattle and sheep, except what is on their backs
and in their intestines, or that which sticks to their bones. This is
how We penalized them for their disobedience: We are true to Our
word. 147 If they [the disbelievers] accuse you [Prophet] of lying, say,
a

i.e. scriptural evidence, cf. verses 143, 144, and 148.

92

The Qur an

6: 148

‘Your Lord has all-encompassing mercy, but His punishment cannot
be diverted from the evildoers.’ 148 The idolaters will say, ‘If God had
willed, we would not have ascribed partners to Him–– nor would our
fathers–– or have declared anything forbidden.’ In the same way,
those before them continually denied [the truth] until they tasted
Our punishment. Say, ‘Have you any knowledge that you can show
us? You follow only supposition and tell only lies.’ 149 Say, ‘The conclusive argument belongs to God alone. Had He so willed He would
have guided you all.’ 150 Say, ‘Bring your witnesses to testify that God
has forbidden all this.’ If they do testify, do not bear witness with
them. Do not follow the whims of those who have denied Our revelation, who do not believe in the Hereafter, and who set up equals with
their Lord.
151 Say, ‘Come! I will tell you what your Lord has really forbidden
you. Do not ascribe anything as a partner to Him; be good to your
parents; do not kill your children in fear of poverty’–– We will
provide for you and for them––‘ stay well away from committing
obscenities, whether openly or in secret; do not take the life God has
made sacred, except by right. This is what He commands you to do:
perhaps you will use your reason. 152 Stay well away from the property of orphans, except with the best [intentions], until they come of
age; give full measure and weight, according to justice’–– We do not
burden any soul with more than it can bear––‘ when you speak, be
just, even if it concerns a relative; keep any promises you make in
God’s name. This is what He commands you to do, so that you may
take heed’–– 153 this is My path, leading straight, so follow it, and do
not follow other ways: they will lead you away from it––‘ This is what
He commands you to do, so that you may refrain from wrongdoing.’
154 Once again, a We gave Moses the Scripture, perfecting [Our
favour] for those who do good, explaining everything clearly, as
guidance and mercy, so that they might believe in the meeting with
their Lord. 155 This, too, is a blessed Scripture which We have sent
down–– follow it and be conscious of your Lord, so that you may
receive mercy–– 156 lest you say, ‘Scriptures were only sent down to
two communities before us: we were not aware of what they studied,’
157 or ‘If only the Scripture had been sent down to us, we would have
a This reiterates the statement in verses 91–3 in response to their denial that God has
ever sent down any revelation.

6: 165

Livestock

93

been better guided than them.’ Now clear evidence, guidance, and
mercy have come to you from your Lord. Who could be more wrong
than someone who rejects God’s revelations and turns away from
them? We shall repay those who turn away with a painful punishment. 158 Are they waiting for the very angels to come to them, or
your Lord Himself, or maybe some of His signs? But on the Day
some of your Lord’s signs a come, no soul will proﬁt from faith if it
had none before, or has not already earned some good through its
faith. Say, ‘Wait if you wish: we too are waiting.’
159 As for those who have divided their religion and broken up into
factions, have nothing to do with them [Prophet]. Their case rests
with God: in time He will tell them about their deeds. 160 Whoever
has done b a good deed will have it ten times to his credit, but whoever has done a bad deed will be repaid only with its equivalent––
they will not be wronged. 161 Say, ‘My Lord has guided me to a
straight path, an upright religion, the faith of Abraham, a man of
pure faith. He was not a polytheist.’ 162 Say, ‘My prayers and sacriﬁce, my life and death, are all for God, Lord of all the Worlds; 163 He
has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the ﬁrst c to
devote myself to Him.’ 164 Say, ‘Should I seek a Lord other than God,
when He is the Lord of all things?’ Each soul is responsible for its
own actions; no soul will bear the burden of another. You will all
return to your Lord in the end, and He will tell you the truth about
your diﬀerences. 165 It is He who made you successors d on the earth
and raises some of you above others in rank, to test you through what
He gives you. [Prophet], your Lord is swift in punishment, yet He is
most forgiving and merciful.
a

Signs of the Day of Judgement.
Lit. Whoever brings, i.e. to the Judgement.
c The ﬁrst ‘of you’: cf. verse 14 and many others.
d See note a to 2: 30.
b

7. THE HEIGHTS
A Meccan sura named after the heights of the barrier which will divide the
righteous from the damned on the Day of Judgement (verse 46). The sura
begins by addressing the Prophet, reassuring him about his revelations, and
closes emphasizing the fact that he merely repeats what is revealed to him. It
warns the disbelievers of their fate via numerous stories of disobedient communities of the past, in the hope that they may take heed and repent before it is
too late. Both subjects also serve to give encouragement to the Prophet and the
believers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim Sad
2 This Book has been sent down to you [Prophet]––let there be no
anxiety in your heart because of it a ––so that you may use it to give
warning and to remind the believers: 3 ‘Follow what has been sent
down to you from your Lord; do not follow other masters beside
Him. How seldom you take heed!’
4 How many towns We have destroyed! Our punishment came to
them by night or while they slept in the afternoon: 5 their only cry
when Our punishment came to them was, ‘How wrong we were!’
6 We shall certainly question those to whom messengers were sent––
and We shall question the messengers themselves––7 and, with full
knowledge, for We were never far from them, We shall tell them
what they did. 8 On that Day the weighing of deeds will be true and
just: those whose good deeds are heavy on the scales will be the ones
to prosper, 9 and those whose good deeds are light will be the ones
who have lost their souls through their wrongful rejection of Our
messages.
10 We established you [people] on the earth and provided you with a
means of livelihood there––small thanks you give! 11 We created you,
We gave you shape, and then We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before
Adam,’ and they did. But not Iblis: he was not one of those who bowed
a

See 6: 33–6; 20: 2.

7: 27

The Heights

95

down. 12 God said, ‘What prevented you from bowing down as I commanded you?’ and he said, ‘I am better than him: You created me from
ﬁre and him from clay.’ 13 God said, ‘Get down from here! This a is no
place for your arrogance. Get out! You are contemptible!’ 14 but Iblis
said, ‘Give me respite until the Day people are raised from the dead,’
15 and God replied, ‘You have respite.’ 16 And then Iblis said, ‘Because
You have put me in the wrong, I will lie in wait for them all on Your
straight path: 17 I will come at them–– from their front and their back,
from their right and their left–– and You will ﬁnd that most of them are
ungrateful.’ 18 God said, ‘Get out! You are disgraced and banished! I
swear I shall ﬁll Hell with you and all who follow you! 19 But you and
your wife, Adam, live in the Garden. Both of you eat whatever you
like, but do not go near this tree or you will become wrongdoers.’
20 Satan whispered to them so as to expose their nakedness, b which
had been hidden from them: he said, ‘Your Lord only forbade you
this tree to prevent you becoming angels or immortals,’ 21 and he
swore to them, ‘I am giving you sincere advice’–– 22 he lured them
with lies. Their nakedness became exposed to them when they had
eaten from the tree: they began to put together leaves from the Garden to cover themselves. Their Lord called to them, ‘Did I not forbid
you to approach that tree? Did I not warn you that Satan was your
sworn enemy?’ 23 They replied, ‘Our Lord, we have wronged our
souls: if You do not forgive us and have mercy, we shall be lost.’ 24 He
said, ‘All of you get out! You are each other’s enemies. c On earth you
will have a place to stay and livelihood–– for a time.’ 25 He said, ‘There
you will live; there you will die; from there you will be brought out.’
26 Children of Adam, We have given you garments to cover
your nakedness and as adornment for you; the garment of Godconsciousness is the best of all garments–– this is one of God’s signs,
so that people may take heed. 27 Children of Adam, do not let Satan
seduce you, as he did your parents, causing them to leave the Garden, stripping them of their garments d to expose their nakedness to
them: he and his forces can see you from where you cannot see
them: We have made evil ones allies to those who do not believe.
The Garden, cf. 20: 117.
Conventionally translated as ‘private parts’, but the Arabic does not necessarily
have this meaning.
c Iblis is the enemy of mankind and vice versa.
d Of God-consciousness. This is one of the views reported by Razi.
a
b

96

The Qur an

7: 28

28 Yet when [these people] do something disgraceful, a they say,
‘We found our forefathers doing this,’ and, ‘God has commanded us
to do this.’ Say [Prophet], ‘God does not command disgraceful
deeds. How can you say about God things that you do not know [to
be true]?’ 29 Say, ‘My Lord commands righteousness. Direct your
worship straight to Him wherever you pray; call on Him; devote
your religion entirely to Him. Just as He ﬁrst created you, so you
will come back [to life] again.’ 30 Some He has guided and some are
doomed to stray: they have taken evil ones rather than God as their
masters, thinking that they are rightly guided. 31 Children of Adam,
dress well b whenever you are at worship, and eat and drink [as We
have permitted] but do not be extravagant: God does not like
extravagant people. 32 Say [Prophet], ‘Who has forbidden the
adornment and the nourishment God has provided for His servants?’ Say, ‘They are [allowed] for those who believe during the life
of this world: they will be theirs alone on the Day of Resurrection.’
This is how We make Our revelation clear for those who
understand.
33 Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord only forbids disgraceful deeds––
whether they be open or hidden–– and sin c and unjustiﬁed aggression, and that you, without His sanction, associate things with Him,
and that you say things about Him without knowledge.’ d 34 There is a
time set for every people: they cannot hasten it, nor, when it comes,
will they be able to delay it for a single moment.
35 Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among
yourselves, reciting My revelations to you, for those who are conscious of God and live righteously, there will be no fear, nor will they
grieve. 36 But those who reject Our revelations and arrogantly scorn
them are the people of the Fire and there they will remain. 37 Who is
more wrong than the person who invents lies against God or rejects
His revelations? Such people will have their preordained share [in
this world], but then, when Our angels arrive to take them back,
a It has been suggested that this could refer to the pagan custom of men and women
walking round the Ka ba naked (Razi).
b Literally ‘wear your adornment’, but this is clearly a reference to clothes and not to
jewellery; cf. 7: 26. See also references to food in 6: 135, 145, 148.
c Razi identiﬁes this as intoxicants because of their link with ‘sin’ in 2: 219 and the
preceding verse about food.
d Revealed knowledge, cf. 6: 148.

7: 48

The Heights

97

saying, ‘Where are those you used to call on beside God?’ they will
say, ‘They have deserted us.’ They will confess that they were disbelievers and 38 God will say, ‘Join the crowds of jinn and humans
who have gone before you into the Fire.’ Every crowd curses its
fellow crowd as it enters, then, when they are all gathered inside, the
last of them will say of the ﬁrst, ‘Our Lord, it was they who led us
astray: give them double punishment in the Fire’–– God says, ‘Every
one of you will have double punishment, though you do not know
it’–– 39 and the ﬁrst of them will say to the last, ‘You were no better
than us: taste the punishment you have earned.’
40 The gates of Heaven will not be open to those who rejected Our
revelations and arrogantly spurned them; even if a thick rope a were
to pass through the eye of a needle they would not enter the Garden.
This is how We punish the guilty–– 41 Hell will be their resting place
and their covering, layer upon layer–– this is how We punish those
who do evil. 42 But those who believe and do good deeds–– and We
do not burden any soul with more than it can bear–– are the people
of the Garden and there they will remain. 43 We shall have removed
all ill feeling from their hearts; streams will ﬂow at their feet. They
will say, ‘Praise be to God, who guided us to this: had God not
guided us, We would never have found the way. The messengers of
our Lord brought the Truth.’ A voice will call out to them, ‘This is
the Garden you have been given as your own on account of your
deeds.’ 44 The people of the Garden will cry out to the people of the
Fire, ‘We have found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have
you found what your Lord promised you to be true?’ and they will
answer, ‘Yes’. A voice will proclaim from their midst, ‘God’s rejection [hangs] over the evildoers: 45 those who turned others away
from God’s path and tried to make it crooked, those who denied the
Hereafter.’
46 A barrier divides the two groups with men on its heights
recognizing each group by their marks: they will call out to the
people of the Garden, ‘Peace be with you!’–– they will not have
entered, but they will be hoping, 47 and when their glance falls upon
the people of the Fire, they will say, ‘Our Lord, do not let us join the
evildoers!’–– 48 and the people of the heights will call out to certain
a Not ‘camel’. The roots of the words for ‘camel’ and ‘thick twisted rope’ are the
same in Arabic and ‘rope’ makes more sense here (Razi).

98

The Qur an

7: 49

men they recognize by their marks, ‘What use were your great
numbers and your false pride? 49 And are these the people you swore
God would never bless? [Now these people are being told], “Enter
the Garden! No fear for you, nor shall you grieve.”’
50 The people of the Fire will call to the people of Paradise, ‘Give
us some water, or any of the sustenance God has granted you!’ and
they will reply, ‘God has forbidden both to the disbelievers–– 51 those
who took their religion for distraction, a mere game, and were
deluded by worldly life.’ Today We shall ignore a them, just as
they have ignored their meeting with this Day and denied Our
Revelations.
52 We have brought people a Scripture–– We have explained it on
the basis of true knowledge–– as guidance and mercy for those who
believe. 53 What are they waiting for but the fulﬁlment of its [ﬁnal
prophecy]? On the Day it is fulﬁlled, those who had ignored it will
say, ‘Our Lord’s messenger spoke the truth. Is there anyone to intercede for us now? Or can we be sent back to behave diﬀerently from
the way we behaved before?’ They will really have squandered their
souls, and all [the idols] they invented will have deserted them.
54 Your Lord is God, who created the heavens and earth in six
Days, then established Himself on the throne; He makes the night
cover the day in swift pursuit; He created the sun, moon, and stars to
be subservient to His command; all creation and command belong to
Him. Exalted be God, Lord of all the worlds! 55 Call on your Lord
humbly and privately–– He does not like those who transgress His
bounds: 56 do not corrupt the earth after it has been set right–– call on
Him fearing and hoping. The mercy of God is close to those who do
good. 57 It is God who sends the winds, bearing good news of His
coming grace, and when they have gathered up the heavy clouds, We
drive them to a dead land where We cause rain to fall, bringing out
all kinds of crops, just as We shall bring out the dead. Will you not
reﬂect? 58 Vegetation comes out of good land in abundance, by the
will of its Lord, but out of bad land only scantily: We explain Our
Revelations in various ways to those who give thanks.
59 We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God:
you have no god other than Him. I fear for you the punishment of a
fearsome Day!’ 60 but the prominent leaders of his people said, ‘We
a

‘Ignore’ is one of the meanings of the Arabic nasiya normally translated as ‘forget’.

7: 75

The Heights

99

believe you are far astray.’ 61 He replied, ‘My people, there is nothing
astray about me! On the contrary, I am a messenger from the Lord of
all the Worlds: 62 I am delivering my Lord’s messages to you and
giving you sincere advice. I know things from God that you do not.
63 Do you ﬁnd it so strange that a message should come from your
Lord–– through a man in your midst–– to warn you and make you
aware of God so that you may be given mercy?’ 64 but they called him
a liar. We saved him, and those who were with him, on the Ark and
We drowned those who rejected Our revelations–– they were wilfully
blind.
65 To the people of  Ad We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My
people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. Will you not
take heed?’ 66 but the disbelieving leaders of his people said, ‘We
believe you are a fool,’ and ‘We think you are a liar.’ 67 He said, ‘My
people, there is nothing foolish about me! On the contrary, I am a
messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds: 68 I am delivering my
Lord’s messages to you. I am your sincere and honest adviser. 69 Do
you ﬁnd it so strange that a message should come from your Lord,
through a man in your midst, to warn you? Remember how He made
you heirs after Noah’s people, and increased your stature: remember
God’s bounties, so that you may prosper.’ 70 They said, ‘Have you
really come to tell us to serve God alone and to forsake what our
forefathers served? If what you say is true, bring us the punishment
you threaten.’ 71 He said, ‘You are already set to receive your Lord’s
loathing and anger. Are you arguing with me about mere names you
and your forefathers invented, names for which God has given no
sanction? Just wait; I too am waiting.’ 72 We saved him, and those who
were with him, through Our mercy; We destroyed those who denied
Our revelations and would not believe.
73 To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih. He said,
‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clear
sign has come to you now from your Lord: this is God’s she-camel––
a sign for you–– so let her graze in God’s land and do not harm her in
any way, or you will be struck by a painful torment. 74 Remember
how He made you heirs after  Ad and settled you in the land to build
yourselves castles on its plains and carve houses out of the mountains: remember God’s blessings and do not spread corruption in the
land,’ 75 but the arrogant leaders among his people said to the
believers they thought to be of no account, ‘Do you honestly think

100

The Qur an

7: 76

that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?’ They said, ‘Yes. We believe
in the message sent through him,’ 76 but the arrogant leaders said,
‘We reject what you believe in,’ 77 and then they hamstrung the
camel. They deﬁed their Lord’s commandment and said, ‘Salih,
bring down the punishment you threaten, if you really are a messenger!’ 78 An earthquake seized them: by the next morning they were
lying dead in their homes. 79 So he turned away from them, saying,
‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages to you and gave you
sincere advice, but you did not like those who gave sincere advice.’
80 We sent Lot and he said to his people, ‘How can you practise this
outrage? No one in the world has outdone you in this. 81 You lust
after men rather than women! You transgress all bounds!’ 82 The only
response his people gave was to say [to one another], ‘Drive them
out of your town! These men want to keep themselves chaste!’
83 We saved him and his kinsfolk–– apart from his wife who stayed
behind–– 84 and We showered upon [the rest of] them a rain [of
destruction]. See the fate of the evildoers.
85 To the people of Midian We sent their brother, Shu ayb. He said,
‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clear
sign has come to you from your Lord. Give full measure and weight
and do not undervalue people’s goods; do not cause corruption in
the land after it has been set in order: this is better for you, if you are
believers. 86 Do not sit in every pathway, threatening and barring
those who believe in God from His way, trying to make it crooked.
Remember how you used to be few and He made you multiply.
Think about the fate of those who used to spread corruption. 87 If
some of you believe the message I bring and others do not, then be
patient till God judges between us. He is the best of all judges.’
88 His people’s arrogant leaders said, ‘Shu ayb, we will expel you
and your fellow believers from our town unless you return to our
religion.’ He said, ‘What! Even if we detest it? 89 If we were to return
to your religion after God has saved us from it, we would be inventing lies about Him: there is no way we could return to it–– unless by
the will of God our Lord: in His knowledge He comprehends everything. We put our trust in God. Our Lord, expose the truth [and
judge] between us and our people, for You are the best judge.’ 90 The
disbelieving leaders among his people said, ‘You will certainly be
losers if you follow Shu ayb’–– 91 an earthquake seized them: by the
next morning they were lying dead in their homes; 92 it was as if those

7: 108

The Heights

101

who had rejected Shu ayb had never lived there; it was those who
had rejected Shu ayb who were the losers–– 93 so he turned away
from them, saying, ‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages to
you and gave you sincere advice, so why should I grieve for people
who refused to believe?’
94 Whenever We sent a prophet to a town, We aﬄicted its [disbelieving] a people with suﬀering and hardships, so that they might
humble themselves [before God], 95 and then We changed their
hardship into prosperity, until they multiplied. But then they said,
‘Hardship and aﬄuence also befell our forefathers,’ and so We took
them suddenly, unawares. 96 If the people of those towns had believed
and been mindful of God, We would have showered them with
blessings from the heavens and earth, but they rejected the truth and
so We punished them for their misdeeds.
97 Do the people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment
will not come upon them by night, while they are asleep? 98 Do the
people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment will not come
upon them by day, while they are at play? 99 Do they feel secure
against God’s plan? Only the losers feel secure against God’s plan.
100 Is it not clear to those who inherit the land from former generations that We can punish them too for their sins if We will? And
seal up their hearts so that they cannot hear? 101 We have told you
[Prophet] the stories of those towns: messengers came to them, and
clear signs, but they would not believe in what they had already
rejected–– in this way God seals the hearts of disbelievers. 102 We
found that most of them did not honour their commitments; We
found that most of them were deﬁant.
103 After these, We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his leading supporters with Our signs, but they rejected them. See the fate of
those who used to spread corruption. 104 Moses said, ‘Pharaoh, I am a
messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds, 105 duty-bound to say
nothing about God but the truth, and I have brought you a clear sign
from your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with me.’ 106 He said,
‘Produce this sign you have brought, if you are telling the truth.’
107 So Moses threw his staﬀ and–– lo and behold!–– it was a snake,
clear to all, 108 and then he pulled out his hand and–– lo and

a

This is implied in Arabic (Razi).

102

The Qur an

7: 109

behold!–– it was white for all to see. 109 The leaders among Pharaoh’s
people said, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer! 110 He means to drive
you out of your land!’ Pharaoh said, ‘What do you suggest?’ 111 They
said, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messengers to
all the cities 112 to summon every learned sorcerer to you.’
113 The sorcerers came to Pharaoh and said, ‘Shall we be rewarded
if we win?’ 114 and he replied, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner court.’
115 So they said, ‘Moses, will you throw ﬁrst or shall we?’ 116 He
said, ‘You throw,’ and they did, casting a spell on people’s eyes,
striking fear into them, and bringing about great sorcery. 117 Then
We inspired Moses, ‘Throw your staﬀ,’ and–– lo and behold!–– it
devoured their fakery. 118 The truth was conﬁrmed and what they
had produced came to nothing: 119 they were defeated there and
utterly humiliated. 120 The sorcerers fell to their knees 121 and said,
‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, 122 the Lord of Moses and
Aaron!’ 123 but Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in Him before I
have given you permission? This is a plot you have hatched to drive
the people out of this city! Soon you will see: 124 I will cut oﬀ your
alternate hands and feet a and then crucify you all!’ 125 They said,
‘And so we shall return to our Lord–– 126 Your only grievance against
us is that we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to
us. Our Lord, pour steadfastness upon us and let us die in devotion
to You.’
127 The leaders among Pharaoh’s people said to him, ‘But are you
going to leave Moses and his people to spread corruption in the land
and forsake you and your gods?’ He replied, ‘We shall kill their male
children, sparing only the females: We have complete power over
them.’ 128 Moses said to his people, ‘Turn to God for help and be
steadfast: the earth belongs to God–– He gives it as their own to
whichever of His servants He chooses–– and the happy future
belongs to those who are mindful of Him,’ 129 and they replied, ‘We
were being persecuted long before you came to us, and since then
too.’ He said, ‘Your Lord may well destroy your enemy and make
you successors to the land to see how you behave.’
130 We inﬂicted years of drought and crop failure on Pharaoh’s
people, so that they might take heed, 131 then, when something good
came their way, they said, ‘This is our due!’. When something bad
a

Left hand and right foot or vice versa.

7: 144

The Heights

103

came, they ascribed it to the evil omen of Moses and those with him,
but their ‘evil omen’ was really from God, though most of them did
not realize it. 132 They said, ‘We will not believe in you, no matter
what signs you produce to cast a spell on us,’ 133 and so We let loose
on them the ﬂood, locusts, lice, frogs, blood–– all clear signs. They
were arrogant, wicked people. 134 They would say, whenever a plague
struck them, ‘Moses, pray to your Lord for us by virtue of the
promise He has made to you: if you relieve us of the plague, we will
believe you and let the Children of Israel go with you,’ 135 but when
We relieved them of the plague and gave them a ﬁxed period [in
which to fulﬁl their promise]–– lo and behold!–– they broke it. 136 And
so, because they rejected Our signs and paid them no heed, We
exacted retribution from them: We drowned them in the sea 137 and
We made those who had been oppressed succeed to both the east and
the west of the land that We had blessed. Your Lord’s good promise
to the Children of Israel was fulﬁlled, because of their patience, and
We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were making and what
they were building.
138 We took the Children of Israel across the sea, but when they
came upon a people who worshipped idols, they said, ‘Moses, make a
god for us like theirs.’ He said, ‘You really are foolish people: 139 [the
cult] these people practise is doomed to destruction, and what they
have been doing is useless. 140 Why should I seek any god other than
God for you, when He has favoured you over all other people?’
141 Remember how We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were
subjecting you to the worst of suﬀerings, killing your male children,
sparing only your females–– that was a mighty ordeal from your
Lord.
142 We appointed thirty nights for Moses, then added ten more: the
term set by his Lord was completed in forty nights. Moses said to his
brother Aaron, ‘Take my place among my people: act rightly and do
not follow the way of those who spread corruption.’ 143 When Moses
came for the appointment, and his Lord spoke to him, he said, ‘My
Lord, show Yourself to me: let me see You!’ He said, ‘You will never
see Me, but look at that mountain: if it remains standing ﬁrm, you
will see Me,’ and when his Lord revealed Himself to the mountain,
He made it crumble: Moses fell down unconscious. When he
recovered, he said, ‘Glory be to You! To You I turn in repentance! I
am the ﬁrst to believe!’ 144 He said, ‘Moses, I have raised you above

104

The Qur an

7: 145

other people by [giving you] My messages and speaking to you: hold
on to what I have given you; be one of those who give thanks.’
145 We inscribed everything for him in the Tablets which taught
and explained everything, saying, ‘Hold on to them ﬁrmly and urge
your people to hold fast to their excellent teachings. I will show you
the end of those who rebel. 146 I will keep distracted from My signs
those who behave arrogantly on Earth without any right, and who,
even if they see every sign, will not believe in them; they will not take
the way of right guidance if they see it, but will take the way of error
if they see that. This is because they denied Our signs and paid them
no heed: 147 the deeds of those who denied Our signs and the Meeting of the Hereafter will come to nothing–– why should they be
repaid for anything other than what they have done?’
148 In his absence, Moses’ people took to worshipping a mere shape
that made sounds like a cow–– a calf made from their jewellery.
Could they not see that it did not speak to them or guide them in any
way? Yet they took it for worship: they were evildoers. 149 When, with
much wringing of hands, they perceived that they were doing wrong,
they said, ‘If our Lord does not have mercy and forgive us, we shall
be the losers.’ 150 On his return to his people, angry and aggrieved,
Moses said, ‘How foul and evil is what you have done in my absence!
Were you so keen to bring your Lord’s judgement forward?’ He
threw the tablets down and seized his brother by the hair, pulling
him towards him. Aaron said, ‘Son of my mother, these people overpowered me! They almost killed me! Do not give my enemies reason
to rejoice! Do not include me with these evildoers!’ 151 Moses said,
‘My Lord, forgive me and my brother; accept us into Your mercy:
You are the Most Merciful of all who show mercy. 152 Those who
took to worshipping the calf will be aﬄicted by their Lord’s wrath,
and by disgrace in this life.’ This is the way We repay those who
invent such falsehoods, 153 but your Lord is most forgiving and most
merciful towards those who do wrong, then repent afterwards and
truly believe.
154 When Moses’ anger abated, he picked up the Tablets, on
which were inscribed guidance and mercy for those who stood in awe
of their Lord. 155 Moses chose from his people seventy men for Our
appointment, and when they were seized by trembling, he prayed,
‘My Lord, if You had chosen to do so, You could have destroyed
them long before this, and me too, so will You now destroy us for

7: 162

The Heights

105

what the foolish among us have done? This is only a trial from You––
through it, You cause whoever You will to stray and guide whoever
You will–– and You are our Protector, so forgive us and have
mercy on us. You are the best of those who forgive. 156 Grant us good
things in this world and in the life to come. We turn to You.’ God
said, ‘I bring My punishment on whoever I will, but My mercy
encompasses all things.
‘I shall ordain My mercy for those who are conscious of God and
pay the prescribed alms; who believe in Our Revelations; 157 who
follow the Messenger–– the unlettered a prophet they ﬁnd described
in the Torah that is with them, and in the Gospel–– who commands
them to do right and forbids them to do wrong, who makes good
things lawful to them and bad things unlawful, and relieves them of
their burdens, and the iron collars b that were on them. So it is those
who believe him, honour and help him, and who follow the light
which has been sent down with him, who will succeed.’ 158 Say
[Muhammad], ‘People, I am the Messenger of God to you all,
from Him who has control over the heavens and the earth. There
is no God but Him; He gives life and death, so believe in God and
His Messenger, the unlettered prophet who believes in God and His
words, and follow him so that you may ﬁnd guidance.’
159 There is a group among the people of Moses who guide with
truth, and who act justly according to it. 160 We divided them into
twelve tribes [as distinct] communities, and, when his people asked
him for water, inspired Moses to strike the rock with his staﬀ [so
that] twelve springs gushed out. Each tribe knew its own drinking
place; We gave them the shade of clouds and sent down to them
manna and quails [saying], ‘Eat the good things We have provided for
you.’ They did not wrong Us; it was themselves they wronged.
161 When they were told, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there as you
will, but say, “Relieve us!” and enter its gate humbly: then We shall
forgive you your sins, and increase the reward of those who do good,’
162 the wrongdoers among them substituted another saying for that
which had been given them, so We sent them a punishment from
heaven for their wrongdoing.
a

Ummi can mean ‘unlettered’ or ‘gentile’.
Cf. 6: 146. This reference is said by interpreters to refer to the diﬃcult obligations
imposed on the Children of Israel.
b

106

The Qur an

7: 163

163 [Prophet], ask them about the town by the sea; how its people
broke the Sabbath when their ﬁsh surfaced for them only on that
day, never on weekdays–– We tested them in this way: because of
their disobedience–– 164 how, when some of them asked [their
preachers], ‘Why do you bother preaching to people God will destroy, or at least punish severely?’ [the preachers] answered, ‘In order
to be free from your Lord’s blame, and so that they may perhaps take
heed.’ 165 When they ignored [the warning] they were given, We
saved those who forbade evil, and punished the wrongdoers severely
because of their disobedience. 166 When, in their arrogance, they persisted in doing what they had been forbidden to do, We said to them,
‘Be like apes! a Be outcasts!’ 167 And then your Lord declared that,
until the Day of Resurrection, He would send people against them to
inﬂict terrible suﬀering on them. Your Lord is swift in punishment
but He is most forgiving and merciful.
168 We dispersed them over the earth in separate communities––
some are righteous and some less so: We tested them with blessings
and misfortunes, so that they might all return [to righteousness]––
169 and they were succeeded by generations who, although they
inherited the Scripture, took the ﬂeeting gains of this lower world,
saying, ‘We shall be forgiven,’ and indeed taking them again if other
such gains came their way. Was a pledge not taken from them, written in the Scripture, to say nothing but the truth about God? And
they have studied its contents well. For those who are mindful of
God, the Hereafter is better. ‘Why do you not use your reason?’
170 But as for those who hold fast to the Scripture and keep up the
prayer, We do not deny righteous people their rewards. 171 When We
made the mountain loom high above them like a shadow, and they
thought it would fall on them, We said, ‘Hold fast to what We have
given you, and remember what it contains, so that you may remain
conscious of God.’
172 [Prophet], when your Lord took out the oﬀspring from the
loins of the Children of Adam and made them bear witness about
themselves, He said, ‘Am I not your Lord?’ and they replied, ‘Yes,
we bear witness.’ So you cannot say on the Day of Resurrection, ‘We
were not aware of this,’ 173 or, ‘It was our forefathers who, before us,
ascribed partners to God, and we are only the descendants who came
a

Cf. note to 2: 65.

7: 188

The Heights

107

after them: will you destroy us because of falsehoods they invented?’
174 In this way We explain the messages, so that they may turn [to the
right path].
175 [Prophet], tell them the story of the man to whom We gave Our
messages: he sloughed them oﬀ, so Satan took him as his follower
and he went astray–– 176 if it had been Our will, We could have used
these signs to raise him high, but instead he clung to the earth and
followed his own desires–– he was like a dog that pants with a lolling
tongue whether you drive it away or leave it alone. Such is the image
of those who reject Our signs. Tell them the story so that they may
reﬂect. 177 How foul is the image of those who reject Our signs! It is
themselves they wrong: 178 whoever God guides is truly guided, and
whoever God allows to stray is a loser. 179 We have created many jinn
and people who are destined for Hell, with hearts they do not use for
comprehension, eyes they do not use for sight, ears they do not use
for hearing. They are like cattle, no, even further astray: these are
the ones who are entirely heedless.
180 The Most Excellent Names belong to God: use them to call on
Him, and keep away from those who abuse them–– they will be
requited for what they do. 181 Among those We created are a group of
people who guide with truth and act justly according to it. 182 But We
lead on those who reject Our messages, step by step, without them
realizing it: 183 I will give them respite, but My plan is sure. 184 Has it
not occurred to them that their companion a is not mad but is giving
clear warning? 185 Have they not contemplated the realm of the
heavens and earth and all that God created, and that the end of their
time might be near? What [other revelation] will they believe in if
they do not believe in this? 186 No one can guide those God allows to
stray: He leaves them blundering about in their insolence.
187 They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, ‘When will it happen?’
Say, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of it: He alone will reveal when
its time will come, a time that is momentous b in both the heavens and
earth. All too suddenly it will come upon you.’ They ask you about
it as if you were eager [to ﬁnd out]. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge
of [when it will come], though most people do not realize it.’ 188 Say
[Prophet], ‘I have no control over beneﬁt or harm, [even] to myself,
a

This refers to Prophet Muhammad.
Alternatively Suddi gives ‘hidden from’ as the interpretation of thaqulat (Razi),
literally ‘weighs heavy’.
b

108

The Qur an

7: 189

except as God may please: if I had knowledge of what is hidden, I
would have abundant good things and no harm could touch me.
I am no more than a bearer of warning, and good news to those
who believe.’
189 It is He who created you all from one soul, and from it made its
mate so that he might ﬁnd comfort in her: when one [of them] lies
with his wife and she conceives a light burden, going about freely,
then grows heavy, they both pray to God, their Lord, ‘If You give us
a good child we shall certainly be grateful,’ 190 and yet when He gives
them a good child they ascribe some of what He has granted them to
others. 191 God is far above the partners they set up alongside Him!
How can they set up with Him these partners that create nothing
and are themselves created, 192 that cannot help them at all, or even
help themselves?
193 If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not follow you: it makes no diﬀerence whether you call them or remain
silent. 194 Those you [idolaters] call upon instead of God are created
beings like you. Call upon them, then, and let them respond to you if
what you say is true. 195 Do they have feet to walk, hands to strike, eyes
to see, or ears to hear? Say [Prophet], ‘Call on your “partners”!
Scheme against me! Do not spare me! 196 My protector is God: He has
revealed the Scripture, and it is He who protects the righteous, 197 but
those you call on instead of Him cannot help you or even help themselves.’ 198 If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not
hear. You [Prophet] may observe them looking at you, but they cannot see. 199 Be tolerant and command what is right: pay no attention to
foolish people. 200 If Satan should prompt you to do something, seek
refuge with God–– He is all hearing, all knowing–– 201 those who are
aware of God think of Him when Satan prompts them to do something and immediately they can see [straight]; 202 the followers of
devils a are led relentlessly into error by them and cannot stop.
203 When you do not bring them a fresh revelation, they say, ‘But
can you not just ask for one?’ Say, ‘I merely repeat b what is revealed
to me from my Lord: this revelation brings you insights from
your Lord, and guidance and mercy for those who believe, 204 so pay
a Ikhwan ‘brothers’––cf. 17: 27, where the devils’ followers are described as their
ikhwan.
b Cf. 75: 18.

7: 206

The Heights

109

attention and listen quietly when the Qur an is recited, so that you
may be given mercy.’ 205 [Prophet], remember your Lord inwardly, in
all humility and awe, without raising your voice, in the mornings and
in the evenings–– do not be one of the heedless–– 206 [even] those who
live in the presence of your Lord are not too proud to worship Him:
they glorify Him and bow down before Him.

8. BATTLE GAINS
The main part of this Medinan sura is a comment on the Battle of Badr (near
Medina), the ﬁrst fought between the Muslims and their Meccan opponents in
the second year after the Migration. The Muslims, some of whom were at ﬁrst
reluctant to ﬁght, won in spite of being vastly outnumbered, and began to
question the distribution of the gains. The sura reminds them that it was God
who brought about the victory. Verse 41 shows how the gains were to be distributed. It advises Muslims and comments on the role of the hypocrites and on
those who always break their treaties (verse 56), ending with a statement about
loyalties and alliances.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 They ask you [Prophet] about [distributing] the battle gains. Say,
‘That is a matter for God and His Messenger, so be mindful of God
and make things right between you. Obey God and His Messenger
if you are true believers: 2 true believers are those whose hearts
tremble with awe when God is mentioned, whose faith increases
when His revelations are recited to them, who put their trust in
their Lord, 3 who keep up the prayer and give to others out of what
We provide for them. 4 Those are the ones who truly believe. They
have high standing with their Lord, forgiveness, and generous
provision.’
5 For a it was your Lord who made you [Prophet] venture from your
home for a true purpose––though a group of the believers disliked it
6 and argued with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as
if they were being driven towards a death they could see with their
own eyes. 7 Remember how God promised you [believers] that one of
the two enemy groups b would fall to you: you wanted the unarmed
group to be yours, but it was God’s will to establish the truth according to His Word and to ﬁnish oﬀ the disbelievers––8 to prove the
Truth to be true, and the false to be false, much as the guilty might
dislike it. 9 When you begged your Lord for help, He answered you,
‘I will reinforce you with a thousand angels in succession.’ 10 God
a
b

This links to v. 1.
The Meccan trade caravan or their army.

8: 25

Battle Gains

111

made this a message of hope to reassure your hearts: help comes only
from God, He is mighty and wise. 11 Remember when He gave you
sleep a as a reassurance from Him, and sent down water from the sky
to cleanse you, to remove Satan’s pollution from you, to make your
hearts strong and your feet ﬁrm. 12 Your Lord revealed to the angels:
‘I am with you: give the believers ﬁrmness; I shall put terror into
the hearts of the disbelievers–– strike above their necks and strike all
their ﬁngertips.’ 13 That was because they opposed God and His
Messenger, and if anyone opposes God and His Messenger, God
punishes them severely–– 14 ‘That is what you get! Taste that!’––and
the torment of the Fire awaits the disbelievers.
15 Believers, when you meet the disbelievers in battle, never turn
your backs on them: 16 if anyone does so on such a day–– unless
manœuvring to ﬁght or to join a ﬁghting group–– he incurs the wrath
of God, and Hell will be his home, a wretched destination! 17 It was
not you who killed them but God, and when you [Prophet] threw
[sand at them] b it was not your throw [that defeated them] but
God’s, to do the believers a favour: God is all seeing and all knowing–– 18 ‘That is what you get!’––and God will weaken the disbelievers’ designs. 19 [Disbelievers], if you were seeking a decision,
now you have witnessed one: if you stop here, it will be better for
you. If you return, so shall We, and your forces, though greater in
number, will be of no use to you. God is with the believers.
20 Believers, obey God and His Messenger: do not turn away when
you are listening to him; 21 do not be like those who say, ‘We heard,’
though in fact they were not listening–– 22 the worst creatures in
God’s eyes are those who are [wilfully] deaf and dumb, who do not
reason. 23 If God had known there was any good in them, He would
have made them hear, but even if He had, they would still have
turned away and taken no notice. 24 Believers, respond to God and
His Messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life. Know
that God comes between a man and his heart, c and that you will be
gathered to Him. 25 Beware of discord that harms not only the
wrongdoers among you: know that God is severe in His punishment.
a

On the night before the battle.
Before the battle, the Prophet prayed and threw a handful of sand at the enemy as a
symbol of their being defeated.
c There are various ways of interpreting this, including that, through death, God
separates a man from his heart’s desire, i.e. life.
b

112

The Qur an

8: 26

26 Remember when you were few, victimized in the land, afraid
that people might catch you, but God sheltered you and strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things so that
you might be grateful. 27 Believers, do not betray God and the
Messenger, or knowingly betray [other people’s] trust in you. 28 Be
aware that your possessions and your children are only a test, and
that there is a tremendous reward with God. 29 Believers, if you
remain mindful of God, He will give you a criterion [to tell right
from wrong] and wipe out your bad deeds, and forgive you: God’s
favour is great indeed.
30 Remember [Prophet] when the disbelievers plotted to take you
captive, kill, or expel you. They schemed and so did God: He is the
best of schemers. 31 Whenever Our Revelation is recited to them they
say, ‘We have heard all this before–– we could say something like this
if we wanted–– this is nothing but ancient fables.’ 32 They also said,
‘God, if this really is the truth from You, then rain stones on us from
the heavens, or send us some other painful punishment.’ 33 But God
would not send them punishment while you [Prophet] are in their
midst, nor would He punish them if they sought forgiveness, 34 yet
why should God not punish them when they debar people from the
Sacred Mosque, although they are not its [rightful] guardians? Only
those mindful of God are its rightful guardians, but most of the
disbelievers do not realize this. 35 Their prayers before the House are
nothing but whistling and clapping. ‘So taste the punishment a for
your disbelief.’ 36 They use their wealth to bar people from the path
of God, and they will go on doing so. In the end this will be a source
of intense regret for them: they will be overcome and herded towards
Hell. 37 God will separate the bad from the good, place the bad on top
of one another–– heaping them all up together–– and put them in
Hell. They will be the losers. 38 [Prophet], tell the disbelievers that if
they desist their past will be forgiven, but if they persist, they have
an example in the fate of those who went before. 39 [Believers], ﬁght
them until there is no more persecution, and all worship b is devoted
to God alone: if they desist, then God sees all that they do, 40 but
if they pay no heed, be sure that God is your protector, the best
protector and the best helper.
a
b

This could allude to their defeat in the battle.
At the Sacred House; cf. 2: 191–3, 2: 17.

8: 52

Battle Gains

113

41 Know that one-ﬁfth of your battle gains belongs to God and the
Messenger, to close relatives and orphans, to the needy and travellers, if you believe in God and the revelation We sent down to Our
servant on the day of the decision, the day when the two forces met
in battle. God has power over all things. 42 Remember when you were
on the near side of the valley, and they were on the far side and the
caravan was below you. If you had made an appointment to ﬁght, you
would have failed to keep it [but the battle took place] so that God
might bring about something already ordained, so that those who
were to die might die after seeing a clear proof, and so that those
who were to live might live after seeing a clear proof–– God is all
hearing and all seeing.
43 [Prophet], remember when God made you see them in your
sleep as few: if He had shown them to you [believers] as many, you
would certainly have lost heart and argued about it, but God saved
you. He knows the secrets of the heart. 44 When you met He showed
them to you as few, and He made you few in their eyes, so that He
might bring about what has been ordained: everything goes back
to God.
45 Believers, when you meet a force in battle, stand ﬁrm and keep
God ﬁrmly in mind, so that you may prosper. 46 Obey God and His
Messenger, and do not quarrel with one another, or you may lose
heart and your spirit may desert you. Be steadfast: God is with the
steadfast. 47 Do not be like those who came out of their homes full
of conceit, showing oﬀ to people, and barring others from the way of
God–– God has full knowledge of all that they do. 48 Satan made their
foul deeds seem fair to them, and said, ‘No one will conquer you
today, for I will be right beside you,’ but when the armies came
within sight of one another he turned on his heels, saying, ‘This is
where I leave you: I see what you do not, and I fear God–– God is
severe in His punishment.’
49 The hypocrites and those who have sickness in their hearts said,
‘These people [the believers] must be deluded by their religion,’ but
if anyone puts his trust in God, God is mighty and wise. 50 If only
you [Prophet] could see, when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, how they strike their faces and backs: it will be said, ‘Taste
the punishment of the Fire. 51 This is caused by what your own
hands have stored up for you: God is never unjust to His creatures.’
52 They are like Pharaoh’s people and those before them who ignored

114

The Qur an

8: 53

God’s signs, so God punished them for their sins: God is strong and
severe in His punishment. 53 [He did] this because God would never
change a favour He had conferred on a people unless they changed
what was within themselves. God is all hearing, all knowing. 54 They
are indeed like Pharaoh’s people and those before them, who denied
the signs of their Lord: We destroyed them for their sins, and We
drowned Pharaoh’s people–– they were all evildoers.
55 The worst creatures in the sight of God are those who reject
Him and will not believe; 56 who, whenever you [Prophet] make a
treaty with them, break it, for they have no fear of God. 57 If you
meet them in battle, make a fearsome example of them to those
who come after them, so that they may take heed. 58 And if you
learn of treachery on the part of any people, throw their treaty
back at them, for God does not love the treacherous. 59 The disbelievers should not think they have won; they cannot escape.
60 Prepare whatever forces you [believers] can muster, including
warhorses, to frighten oﬀ God’s enemies and yours, and warn
others unknown to you but known to God. Whatever you give in
God’s cause will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be
wronged. 61 But if they incline towards peace, you [Prophet] must
also incline towards it, and put your trust in God: He is the All
Hearing, the All Knowing. 62 If they intend to deceive you, God is
enough for you: it was He who strengthened you with His help,
63 and with the believers, and brought their hearts together. Even if
you had given away everything in the earth you could not have done
this, but God brought them together: God is mighty and wise.
64 Prophet, God is enough for you, and for the believers who follow
you. 65 Prophet, urge the believers to ﬁght: if there are twenty of you
who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred, and a hundred
of you, if steadfast, will overcome a thousand of the disbelievers, for
they are people who do not understand. 66 But God has lightened
your burden for now, knowing that there is weakness in you–– a
steadfast hundred of you will defeat two hundred and a steadfast
thousand of you will defeat two thousand, by God’s permission:
God is with the steadfast.
67 It is not right for a prophet to take captives before he has
a Translators use ‘if you fear’, but one of the old meanings of khafa is ‘to know’ and
‘to be certain’.

8: 75

Battle Gains

115

conquered the battleﬁeld. You [people] desire the transient goods of
this world, but God desires the Hereafter [for you]–– God is mighty
and wise–– 68 and had it not been preordained by God, a severe punishment would have come upon you for what you have taken. 69 So
enjoy a in a good and lawful manner the things you have gained in
war and be mindful of God: He is forgiving and merciful.
70 Prophet, tell those you have taken captive, ‘If God knows of
any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what
has been taken from you, and He will forgive you: God is forgiving
and merciful.’ 71 But if they mean to betray you, they have betrayed
God before, and He has given you mastery over them: He is all
knowing, all wise.
72 Those who believed and emigrated [to Medina] and struggled
for God’s cause with their possessions and persons, and those who
gave refuge and help, are all allies of one another. As for those
who believed but did not emigrate, you are not responsible for their
protection until they have done so. But if they seek help from you
against persecution, it is your duty to assist them, except against
people with whom you have a treaty: God sees all that you do.
73 The disbelievers support one another. If you do not do the same,
there will be persecution in the land and great corruption. 74 Those
who believed and emigrated, and struggled for God’s cause, and
those who gave refuge and help–– they are the true believers and they
will have forgiveness and generous provision. 75 And those who came
to believe afterwards, and emigrated and struggled alongside you,
they are part of you, but relatives still have prior claim over one
another in God’s Scripture: God has full knowledge of all things.
a

Literally ‘eat’.

9. REPENTANCE
A Medinan sura whose title is taken from verse 104. The sura opens by giving
notice of the severance of the treaty with the idolaters because they had broken
it, but the bulk of the sura deals with preparations and recruitment for
the expedition to Tabuk, which took place in the heat of the summer of ah 9
(631 ce). The hypocrites and those who stayed behind and failed to support
the Prophet are all censured. This is the only sura not to begin with the formula
‘In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy’; there is an
opinion that suras 8 and 9 are in fact just one sura.

1 A release by God and His Messenger from the treaty you
[believers] made with the idolaters [is announced]––2 you [idolaters]
may move freely about the land for four months, but you should
bear in mind both that you will not escape God, and that God will
disgrace those who defy [Him]. a 3 On the Day of the Great Pilgrimage [there will be] a proclamation from God and His Messenger
to all people: ‘God and His Messenger are released from [treaty]
obligations to the idolaters. It will be better for you [idolaters] if
you repent; know that you cannot escape God if you turn away.’
[Prophet], warn those who ignore [God] that they will have a painful punishment. 4As for those who have honoured the treaty you
made with them and who have not supported anyone against you:
fulﬁl your agreement with them to the end of their term. God loves
those who are mindful of Him.
5 When the [four] forbidden months are over, wherever b you
encounter the idolaters, c kill them, seize them, besiege them, wait
for them at every lookout post; but if they turn [to God], maintain
the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, let them go on their way, for
God is most forgiving and merciful. 6 If any one of the idolaters
should seek your protection [Prophet], grant it to him so that he may
hear the word of God, then take him to a place safe for him, for they
are people with no knowledge [of it]. 7 How could there be a treaty
a ‘Kafara bi (something)’ in Arabic can mean ‘disown (something)’ (al-Mu jam
al-Wasit), so kuﬀar here could also mean ‘those who disown [the treaty]’.
b Inside or outside the Sanctuary in Mecca. See note d to 2: 191.
c In this context, this deﬁnitely refers to the ones who broke the treaty. The article
here is ahdiya (speciﬁc) referring to what has already been stated.

9: 20

Repentance

117

with God and His Messenger for such idolaters? But as for those
with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque, so long as they
remain true to you, be true to them; God loves those who are mindful of Him. 8 [How,] when, if they were to get the upper hand over
you, they would not respect any tie with you, of kinship or of treaty?
They please you with their tongues, but their hearts are against you
and most of them are lawbreakers. 9 They have sold God’s message
for a triﬂing gain, and barred others from His path. How evil their
actions are! 10 Where believers are concerned, they respect no tie of
kinship or treaty. They are the ones who are committing aggression.
11 If they turn to God, keep up the prayer, and pay the prescribed
alms, then they are your brothers in faith: We make the messages
clear for people who are willing to learn. 12 But if they break their
oath after having made an agreement with you, if they revile your
religion, then ﬁght the leaders of disbelief–– oaths mean nothing to
them–– so that they may stop. 13 How could you not ﬁght a people
who have broken their oaths, who tried to drive the Messenger out,
who attacked you ﬁrst? Do you fear them? It is God you should fear
if you are true believers. 14 Fight them: God will punish them at your
hands, He will disgrace them, He will help you to conquer them, He
will heal the believers’ feelings 15 and remove the rage from their
hearts. God turns to whoever He will in His mercy; God is all
knowing and wise. 16 Do you think that you will be left untested a
without God identifying which of you will strive for His cause and
take no supporters apart from God, His Messenger, and other
believers? God is fully aware of all your actions.
17 It is not right for the idolaters to tend God’s places of worship
while testifying to their own disbelief: the deeds of such people will
come to nothing and they will abide in Hell. 18 The only ones who
should tend God’s places of worship are those who believe in God
and the Last Day, who keep up the prayer, who pay the prescribed
alms, and who fear no one but God: such people may hope to be
among the rightly guided. 19 Do you consider giving water to pilgrims and tending the Sacred Mosque to be equal to the deeds of
those who believe in God and the Last Day and who strive in
God’s path? They are not equal in God’s eyes. God does not guide
such benighted people. 20 Those who believe, who migrated and
a

See also 29: 2.

118

The Qur an

9: 21

strove hard in God’s way with their possessions and their persons,
are in God’s eyes much higher in rank; it is they who will triumph;
21 and their Lord gives them the good news of His mercy and pleasure, Gardens where they will have lasting bliss 22 and where they will
remain for ever: truly, there is a tremendous reward with God.
23 Believers, do not take your fathers and brothers as allies a if they
prefer disbelief to faith: those of you who do so are doing wrong.
24 Say [Prophet], ‘If your fathers, sons, brothers, wives, tribes, the
wealth you have acquired, the trade which you fear will decline, and
the dwellings you love are dearer to you than God and His Messenger and the struggle in His cause, then wait until God brings about
His punishment.’ God does not guide those who break away. 25 God
has helped you [believers] on many battleﬁelds, even on the day of
the Battle of Hunayn. b You were well pleased with your large numbers, but they were of no use to you: the earth seemed to close in on
you despite its spaciousness, and you turned tail and ﬂed. 26 Then
God sent His calm down to His Messenger and the believers, and
He sent down invisible forces. He punished the disbelievers–– this
is what the disbelievers deserve–– 27 but God turns in His mercy to
whoever He will. God is most forgiving and merciful.
28 Believers, those who ascribe partners to God are truly unclean:
do not let them come near the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you
are afraid you may become poor, [bear in mind that] God will enrich
you out of His bounty if He pleases: God is all knowing and wise.
29 Fight those of the People of the Book who do not [truly] c believe
in God and the Last Day, who do not forbid what God and His
Messenger have forbidden, who do not obey the rule of justice, d
until they pay the tax e and agree to submit. f 30 The Jews said, ‘Ezra is
Against the Muslims. Cf. 4: 144.
This took place in a valley between Mecca and Ta if in the year ah 8/630 ce.
c ‘Truly’ is implied, as it is in many other statements in the Qur an, e.g. 2: 32; 8: 41;
and 65: 3.
d The main meaning of the Arabic dana is ‘he obeyed’. It also means ‘behave’, and
‘follow a way of life or religion’ (Qamus and Lane).
e Etymologically, jizya means ‘payment in return’, related to jaza meaning ‘reward’,
i.e. in return for the protection of the Muslim state with all the accruing beneﬁts and
exemption from military service, and such taxes on Muslims as zakah. This tax was
levied only on able-bodied free men who could aﬀord it, and monks were exempted.
The amount was generally low (e.g. one dinar per year).
f Commentators in the past generally understood wa hum saghirun to mean they
should be humiliated when paying. However, it is clear from the context that they were
unwilling to pay, and the clause simply means they should submit to paying this tax.
a
b

9: 38

Repentance

119

the son of God,’ a and the Christians said, ‘The Messiah is the son of
God’: they said this with their own mouths, repeating what earlier
disbelievers had said. May God confound them! How far astray they
have been led! 31 They take their rabbis and their monks as lords, as
well as Christ, the son of Mary. But they were commanded to serve
only one God: there is no god but Him; He is far above whatever
they set up as His partners! 32 They try to extinguish God’s light
with their mouths, but God insists on bringing His light to its fullness, even if the disbelievers hate it. 33 It is He who has sent His
Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to show that it is
above all [other] religions, however much the idolaters may hate this.
34 Believers, many rabbis and monks wrongfully consume people’s
possessions and turn people away from God’s path. [Prophet], tell
those who hoard gold and silver instead of giving in God’s cause that
they will have a grievous punishment: 35 on the Day it is heated up in
Hell’s Fire and used to brand their foreheads, sides, and backs, they
will be told, ‘This is what you hoarded up for yourselves! Now feel
the pain of what you hoarded!’
36 God decrees that there are twelve months–– ordained in God’s
Book on the Day when He created the heavens and earth–– four
months of which are sacred: b this is the correct calculation. c Do not
wrong your souls in these months–– though you may ﬁght the
idolaters at any time, d if they ﬁrst ﬁght you–– remember that God is
with those who are mindful of Him. 37 Postponing sacred months
is another act of disobedience by which those who disregard [God]
are led astray: they will allow it one year and forbid it in another in
order outwardly to conform with the number of God’s sacred
months, but in doing so they permit what God has forbidden. Their
evil deeds are made alluring to them: God does not guide those who
disregard [Him].
38 Believers, why, when it is said to you, ‘Go and ﬁght in God’s
way,’ do you feel weighed down to the ground? Do you prefer this
a Clearly this refers to a certain group who, possibly at the time of the Prophet or
earlier, made this claim.
b These are Rajab, Dhu ’l-Qa da, Dhu ’l-Hijjah, and Muharram in the Muslim lunar
calendar. Fighting was not allowed during these months (except in self-defence).
Cf. 2: 194.
c One of the meanings of din is ‘calculation’ or ‘reckoning’.
d Another interpretation of kafatan is ‘all together’.

120

The Qur an

9: 39

world to the life to come? How small the enjoyment of this world
is, compared with the life to come! 39 If you do not go out and
ﬁght, God will punish you severely and put others in your place,
but you cannot harm Him in any way: God has power over all
things. 40 Even if you do not help the Prophet, God helped him
when the disbelievers drove him out: when the two of them a were
in the cave, he [Muhammad] said to his companion, ‘Do not
worry, God is with us,’ and God sent His calm down to him, aided
him with forces invisible to you, and brought down the disbelievers’ plan. God’s plan is higher: God is almighty and wise.
41 So go out, no matter whether you are lightly or heavily armed,
and struggle in God’s way with your possessions and your persons: this is better for you, if you only knew. 42 They would certainly have followed you [Prophet] if the beneﬁt was within sight
and the journey short, but the distance seemed too great for them.
They will swear by God, ‘If we could, we certainly would go out
[to battle] with you,’ but they ruin themselves, for God knows that
they are lying.
43 God forgive you [Prophet]! Why did you give them permission
to stay at home before it had become clear to you which of them
spoke the truth and which were liars? 44 Those who have faith in God
and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from struggle with
their possessions and their persons–– God knows exactly who is
mindful of Him–– 45 only those who do not have faith in God and the
Last Day ask your permission to stay at home: they have doubt in
their hearts and so they waver. 46 If they had really wanted to go out
[to battle] with you, they would have made preparations, but God
was loath to let them rise up and made them hold back. It was said,
‘Stay with those who stay behind.’ 47 They would only have given
you trouble if they had gone out [to battle] with you: they would
have scurried around, trying to sow discord among you, and some of
you would willingly have listened to them–– God knows exactly who
does evil. 48 Indeed, they had tried before that to stir up discord: they
devised plots against you [Prophet] until the truth was exposed and
God’s will triumphed, much to their disgust. 49 Some of them said,
‘Give me permission to stay at home: do not trouble me.’ They
are already in trouble: Hell will engulf the disbelievers. 50 If you
a

The Prophet and his companion Abu Bakr.

9: 63

Repentance

121

[Prophet] have good fortune, it will grieve them, but if misfortune
comes your way, they will say to themselves, ‘We took precautions
for this,’ and go away rejoicing. 51 Say, ‘Only what God has decreed
will happen to us. He is our Master: let the believers put their trust
in God.’ 52 Say, ‘Do you expect something other than one of the two
best things to happen to us? a Well, we expect God to inﬂict punishment
on you, either from Himself or at our hands. So wait; we too are
waiting.’ 53 Say, ‘Whether you give willingly or unwillingly, what you
give will not be accepted, for you are disobedient people.’ 54 The only
thing that prevents what they give from being accepted is the fact
that they defy God and His Messenger, perform the prayer only
lazily, and give only grudgingly. 55 So [Prophet] do not let their
possessions or their children impress you: through these God
intends to punish them in this world and for their souls to depart
while they disbelieve.
56 They swear by God that they belong with you [believers], but
they do not. They are cowardly: 57 if they could ﬁnd a place of
refuge, or a cave, or somewhere to crawl into, they would run there
with great haste. 58 Some of them ﬁnd fault with you [Prophet]
regarding the distribution of alms: they are content if they are given
a share, but angry if not. 59 If only they would be content with what
God and His Messenger have given them, and say, ‘God is enough
for us–– He will give us some of His bounty and so will His Messenger–– to God alone we turn in hope.’ 60 Alms are meant only for the
poor, the needy, those who administer them, those whose hearts need
winning over, to free slaves and help those in debt, for God’s cause,
and for travellers in need. This is ordained by God; God is all
knowing and wise.
61 There are others who insult the Prophet by saying, ‘He will
listen to anything.’ Say, ‘He listens for your own good: he believes in
God, trusts the believers, and is a mercy for those of you who
believe.’ An agonizing torment awaits those who insult God’s
Messenger. 62 They swear by God in order to please you [believers]:
if they were true believers it would be more ﬁtting for them to
please God and His Messenger. 63 Do they not know that whoever
opposes God and His Messenger will go to the Fire of Hell and stay
there? That is the supreme disgrace.
a

Victory or reward in the next world.

122

The Qur an

9: 64

64 The hypocrites fear that a sura will be revealed exposing what is
in their hearts–– say, ‘Carry on with your jokes: God will bring about
what you fear!’–– 65 yet if you were to question them, they would be
sure to say, ‘We were just chatting, just amusing ourselves.’ Say,
‘Were you making jokes about God, His Revelations, and His Messenger? 66 Do not try to justify yourselves; you have gone from belief
to disbelief.’ We may forgive some of you, but We will punish others:
they are evildoers. 67 The hypocrites, both men and women, are all
the same: they order what is wrong and forbid what is right; they are
tight-ﬁsted. They have ignored God, so He has ignored them. a The
hypocrites are the disobedient ones. 68 God promises the Fire of Hell
as a permanent home for the hypocrites, both men and women, and
the disbelievers: this is enough for them. God rejects them and a
lasting punishment awaits them. 69 ‘You b are like those who lived
before you: they were even stronger than you, with more wealth and
children; they enjoyed their share in this life as you have enjoyed
yours; like them, you have indulged in idle talk.’ Their deeds go to
waste in this world and the next; it is they who will lose all in the life
to come. 70 Have they never heard the stories about their predecessors, the peoples of Noah,  Ad, Thamud, Abraham, Midian, and the
ruined cities? Their messengers came to them with clear evidence of
the truth: God would not deceive them; they deceived themselves.
71 The believers, both men and women, support each other; they
order what is right and forbid what is wrong; they keep up the prayer
and pay the prescribed alms; they obey God and His Messenger.
God will give His mercy to such people: God is almighty and
wise. 72 God has promised the believers, both men and women,
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams where they will remain; good,
peaceful homes in Gardens of lasting bliss; and–– greatest of all––
God’s good pleasure. That is the supreme triumph.
73 Prophet, strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites,
and be tough with them. Hell is their ﬁnal home–– an evil destination! 74 They swear by God that they did not, but they certainly did
speak words of deﬁance and became deﬁant after having submitted; they tried to do something, c though they did not achieve it,
See note to 7: 51.
Another example of iltifat: God turns to address them.
c To harm the Prophet.
a
b

9: 87

Repentance

123

––being spiteful was their only response to God and His Messenger
enriching them out of His bounty. They would be better oﬀ turning
back [to God]: if they turn away, God will punish them in this world
and the Hereafter, and there will be no one on earth to protect or
help them.
75 There are some among them who pledged themselves to God,
saying, ‘If God gives us some of His bounty, we shall certainly give
alms and be righteous,’ 76 yet when He did give them some of His
bounty, they became mean and turned obstinately away. 77 Because
they broke their promise to God, because of all the lies they told, He
made hypocrisy settle in their hearts until the Day they meet Him.
78 Do they not realize that God knows their secrets and their private
discussions? That God knows all that is hidden? 79 It is they who
criticize the believers who give freely and those who can only give a
little with great eﬀort: they scoﬀ at such people, but it is God who
scoﬀs at them–– a painful punishment awaits them. 80 It makes no
diﬀerence [Prophet] whether you ask forgiveness for them or not:
God will not forgive them even if you ask seventy times, because
they reject God and His Messenger. God does not guide those who
rebel against Him.
81 Those who were left behind were happy to stay behind when
God’s Messenger set out; they hated the thought of striving in God’s
way with their possessions and their persons. They said to one
another, ‘Do not go [to war] in this heat.’ Say, ‘Hellﬁre is hotter.’ If
only they understood! 82 Let them laugh a little; they will weep a lot
in return for what they have done. 83 So [Prophet], if God brings you
back to a group of them, who ask you for permission to go out [to
battle], say, ‘You will never go out and ﬁght an enemy with me: you
chose to sit at home the ﬁrst time, so remain with those who stay
behind now.’
84 Do not hold prayers for any of them if they die, and do not stand
by their graves: they disbelieved in God and His Messenger and died
rebellious. 85 Do not let their possessions and their children impress
you: God means to punish them through these in this world, and
that their souls should depart while they disbelieve. 86 When a sura is
revealed [saying], ‘Believe in God and strive hard alongside His
Messenger,’ their wealthy ask your permission [to be exempt], saying,
‘Allow us to stay behind with the others’: 87 they prefer to be with
those who stay behind. Their hearts have been sealed: they do not

124

The Qur an

9: 88

comprehend. 88 But the Messenger and those who believe with him
strive hard with their possessions and their persons. The best things
belong to them; it is they who will prosper. 89 God has prepared
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams for them and there they will
stay. That is the supreme triumph.
90 Some of the desert Arabs, too, came to make excuses, asking to
be granted exemption. Those who lied to God and His Messenger
stayed behind at home. A painful punishment will aﬄict those of
them who disbelieved, 91 but there is no blame attached to the weak,
the sick, and those who have no means to spend, provided they are
true to God and His Messenger–– there is no reason to reproach
those who do good: God is most forgiving and merciful. 92 And there
is no blame attached to those who came to you [Prophet] for riding
animals and to whom you said, ‘I cannot ﬁnd a mount for you’: they
turned away with their eyes overﬂowing with tears of grief that they
had nothing they could contribute. 93 The ones open to blame are
those who asked you for exemption despite their wealth, and who
preferred to be with those who stay behind. God has sealed their
hearts: they do not understand.
94 When you return from the expedition they will carry on coming
to you [believers] with excuses. Say, ‘Do not make excuses. We do
not believe you: God has told us about you. God and His Messenger
will watch your actions now, and in the end you will be returned to
the One who knows the seen and the unseen. He will confront you
with what you have done.’ 95 When you return to them, they will
swear to you by God in order to make you leave them alone–– so leave
them alone: they are loathsome, and Hell will be their home as a
reward for their actions–– 96 they will swear to you in order to make
you accept them, but even if you do accept them, God will not accept
people who rebel against Him.
97 The desert Arabs are the most stubborn of all peoples in their
disbelief and hypocrisy. They are the least likely to recognize the
limits that God has sent down to His Messenger. God is all knowing
and all wise. 98 Some of the desert Arabs consider what they give to
be an imposition; they are waiting for fortune to turn against you,
but fortune will turn against them. God is all hearing and all knowing. 99 But there are also some desert Arabs who believe in God and
the Last Day and consider their contributions as bringing them
nearer to God and the prayers of the Messenger: they will indeed

9: 109

Repentance

125

bring them nearer and God will admit them to His mercy. God is
most forgiving and merciful.
100 God will be well pleased with the ﬁrst emigrants and helpers a
and those who followed them in good deeds, and they will be well
pleased with Him: He has prepared Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams for them, there to remain for ever. That is the supreme
triumph.
101 Some of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, as are
some of the people of Medina–– they are obstinate in their hypocrisy.
You [Prophet] do not know them, but We know them well: We shall
punish them twice and then they will be returned to [face] a painful
punishment [in the Hereafter]. 102 And there are others who have
confessed their wrongdoing, who have done some righteous deeds
and some bad ones: God may well accept their repentance, for God
is most forgiving and merciful. 103 In order to cleanse and purify
them [Prophet], accept b a gift out of their property [to make amends]
and pray for them–– your prayer will be a comfort to them. God is all
hearing, all knowing. 104 Do they not know that it is God Himself
who accepts repentance from His servants and receives what is given
freely for His sake? He is always ready to accept repentance,
most merciful. 105 Say [Prophet], ‘Take action! God will see your
actions–– as will His Messenger and the believers–– and then you will
be returned to Him who knows what is seen and unseen, and He will
tell you what you have been doing. 106 And there are others who are
waiting for God’s decree, either to punish them or to show them
mercy. God is all knowing and wise.
107 Then there are those who built a mosque c ––in an attempt to
cause harm, disbelief, and disunity among the believers––as an outpost for those who fought God and His Messenger before: they
swear, ‘Our intentions were nothing but good,’ but God bears witness that they are liars. 108 [Prophet], never pray in that mosque. You
should rather pray in a mosque founded from its ﬁrst day on consciousness of God: in this mosque there are men who desire to grow
in purity–– God loves those who seek to purify themselves. 109 Which
is better, the person who founds his building on consciousness of
a

The Medinan Muslims who welcomed and supported the emigrants from Mecca.
Literally ‘take’.
c Abu  Amir al-Rahib told the hypocrites to build a rival mosque in order to sow
dissension in the community.
b

126

The Qur an

9: 110

God and desire for His good pleasure, or the person who founds his
building on the brink of a crumbling precipice that will tumble down
into the Fire of Hell, taking him with it? God does not guide the
evildoers: 110 the building they have founded will always be a source
of doubt within their hearts, until their hearts are cut to pieces. God
is all knowing and wise.
111 God has purchased the persons and possessions of the believers
in return for the Garden–– they ﬁght in God’s way: they kill and are
killed–– this is a true promise given by Him in the Torah, the Gospel,
and the Qur an. Who could be more faithful to his promise than
God? So be happy with the bargain you have made: that is the
supreme triumph. 112 [The believers are] those who turn to God in
repentance; who worship and praise Him; who bow down and prostrate themselves; who order what is good and forbid what is wrong
and who observe God’s limits. Give glad news to such believers.
113 It is not ﬁtting for the Prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters–– even if they are related to them–– after having
been shown that they are the inhabitants of the Blaze: 114 Abraham
asked forgiveness for his father because he had made a promise to
him, but once he realized that his father was an enemy of God, he
washed his hands of him. Abraham was tender-hearted and forbearing. 115 God would not condemn for going astray those He has
already guided [to the faith] before making entirely clear to them
what they should avoid. a God has knowledge of everything; 116 control of the heavens and earth belongs to God; He alone gives life and
death; you have no ally or helper other than Him.
117 In His mercy God has turned to the Prophet, and the emigrants
and helpers who followed him in the hour of adversity when some
hearts almost wavered: He has turned to them; He is most kind and
merciful to them. 118 And to the three men who stayed behind: when
the earth, for all its spaciousness, closed in around them, when their
very souls closed in around them, when they realized that the only
refuge from God was with Him, He turned to them in mercy in
order for them to return [to Him]. God is the Ever Relenting, the
Most Merciful.
119 You who believe, be mindful of God: stand with those who are
a This reassured the Muslims who had been praying for their disbelieving ancestors
that they would not be blamed for having done this.

9: 129

Repentance

127

true. 120 The people of Medina and their neighbouring desert Arabs
should not have held back from following God’s Messenger, nor
should they have cared about themselves more than him: if ever they
suﬀer any thirst, weariness, or hunger in God’s cause, take any step that
angers the disbelievers, or cause any harm to an enemy, a good deed
is recorded in their favour on account of it–– God never wastes the
reward of those who do good–– 121 if they spend a little or a lot for
God’s cause, if they traverse a mountain pass, all this is recorded to
their credit so that God can reward them in accordance with the best
of their deeds.
122 Yet it is not right for all the believers to go out [to battle]
together: out of each community, a group should go out to gain
understanding of the religion, so that they can teach their people
when they return and so that they can guard themselves against evil.
123 You who believe, ﬁght the disbelievers near you and let them ﬁnd
you standing ﬁrm: be aware that God is with those who are mindful
of Him.
124 When a sura is revealed, some [hypocrites] say, ‘Have any of you
been strengthened in faith by it?’ It certainly does strengthen the
faith of those who believe and they rejoice, 125 but, as for the perverse
at heart, each new sura adds further to their perversity. They die
disbelieving. 126 Can they not see that they are aﬄicted once or twice
a year? Yet they neither repent nor take heed. 127 Whenever a sura is
revealed, they look at each other and say, ‘Is anyone watching you?’
and then they turn away–– God has turned their hearts away because
they are people who do not use their reason.
128 A Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Your
suﬀering distresses him: he is deeply concerned for you and full of
kindness and mercy towards the believers. 129 If they turn away,
[Prophet], say ,‘God is enough for me: there is no god but Him; I put
my trust in Him; He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.’

10. JONAH
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the reference to Jonah in verse 98. It
stresses God’s power, the authenticity of the Qur an, and the fate of evildoers.
God’s anger at those who consistently deny the truth of His revelations and
signs is made clear, as is the fact that, were it not for His decision to await the
Day of Resurrection, His judgement would already have fallen upon them.
The Prophet is encouraged to be patient and reminded of the fact that he cannot
force people to believe.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the wise a Book. 2 Is it so surprising to people
that We have revealed to a man from among them that he should
warn people, and give glad news to those who believe, that they are
on a sure footing with their Lord? [Yet] those who disbelieve say,
‘This man is clearly a sorcerer.’
3 Your Lord is God who created the heavens and earth in six
Days, b then established Himself on the Throne, governing everything; there is no one that can intercede with Him, unless He has
ﬁrst given permission: this is God your Lord so worship Him. How
can you not take heed? 4 It is to Him you shall all return––that is a
true promise from God. It was He who created [you] in the ﬁrst
place, and He will do so again, so that He may justly reward those
who believe and do good deeds. But the disbelievers will have a drink
of scalding water, and agonizing torment, because they persistently
disbelieved.
5 It is He who made the sun a shining radiance and the moon a
light, determining phases for it so that you might know the number
of years and how to calculate time. God did not create all these
without a true purpose; He explains His signs to those who understand. 6 In the succession of night and day, and in what God created
a Hakim is understood in various ways: to mean ‘full of wisdom’, to suggest that it
gives decisions on matters, and to convey that it is perfected and well formed.
b Not the sort of days we know––see 32: 5; 70: 4.

10: 19

Jonah

129

in the heavens and earth, there truly are signs for those who are
aware of Him. 7 Those who do not expect a to meet Us and are
pleased with the life of this world, contenting themselves with it and
paying no heed to Our signs, 8 shall have the Fire for their home
because of what they used to do. 9 But as for those who believe and do
good deeds, their Lord will guide them because of their faith.
Streams will ﬂow at their feet in the Gardens of Bliss. 10 Their prayer
in them will be, ‘Glory be to You, God!’ their greeting, ‘Peace,’ and
the last part of their prayer, ‘Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds.’
11 If God were to hasten on for people the harm [they have earned]
as they wish to hasten on the good, their time would already be up.
But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander blindly
in their excesses. 12 When trouble befalls man he cries out to Us,
whether lying on his side, sitting, or standing, but as soon as We
relieve him of his trouble he goes on his way as if he had never cried
out to Us to remove his trouble. In this way the deeds of such
heedless people are made attractive to them. 13 Before you people, We
destroyed whole generations when they did evil–– their messengers
brought them clear signs but they refused to believe. This is how We
repay the guilty. 14 Later We made you their successors in the land, to
see how you would behave.
15 When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do
not expect to meet with Us say, ‘Bring [us] a diﬀerent Qur an, or
change it.’ [Prophet], say, ‘It is not for me to change it of my own
accord; I only follow what is revealed to me, for I fear the torment of
an awesome Day, if I were to disobey my Lord.’ 16 Say, ‘If God had so
willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it
known to you. I lived a whole lifetime among you before it came to
me. How can you not use your reason?’
17 Who could be more wicked than someone who invents lies
against God or denies His revelations? The guilty will never prosper.
18 They worship alongside God things that can neither harm nor
beneﬁt them, and say, ‘These are our intercessors b with God.’ Say,
‘Do you think you can tell God about something He knows not to
exist in the heavens or earth? Glory be to Him! He is far above the
partner-gods they associate with Him! 19 All people were originally
a
b

Or ‘fear’ (one of the meanings of yarjuna).
See above, verse 3.

130

10: 20

The Qur an

one single community, but later they diﬀered. If it had not been for a
word a from your Lord, the preordained judgement would already
have been passed between them regarding their diﬀerences. 20 They
say, ‘Why has no miraculous sign been sent down to him from his
Lord?’ Say [Prophet], ‘Only God knows the unseen, so wait–– I too
am waiting.’ 21 No sooner do We let people taste some mercy after
some hardship has aﬄicted them, than they begin to scheme against
Our revelations. Say, ‘God schemes even faster.’ Our messengers b
record all your scheming.
22 It is He who enables you to travel on land and sea until, when
you are sailing on ships and rejoicing in the favouring wind, a storm
arrives: waves come at those on board from all sides and they feel
there is no escape. Then they pray to God, professing sincere devotion to Him, ‘If You save us from this we shall be truly thankful.’
23 Yet no sooner does He save them than, back on land, they behave
outrageously against all that is right. People! Your outrageous
behaviour only works against yourselves. Take your little enjoyment
in this present life; in the end you will return to Us and We shall
confront you with everything you have done.
24 The life of this world is like this: rain that We send down from
the sky is absorbed by the plants of the earth, from which humans
and animals eat. But when the earth has taken on its ﬁnest appearance, and adorns itself, and its people think they have power over it,
then the fate We commanded comes to it, by night or by day, and We
reduce it to stubble, as if it had not ﬂourished just the day before.
This is the way We explain the revelations for those who reﬂect.
25 But God invites [everyone] to the Home of Peace, and guides
whoever He will to a straight path. 26 Those who did well will have
the best reward and more besides. Neither darkness nor shame will
cover their faces: these are the companions in Paradise, and there
they will remain. 27 As for those who did evil, each evil deed will be
requited by its equal and humiliation will cover them–– no one will
protect them against God–– as though their faces were covered with
veils cut from the darkness of the night. These are the inmates of the
Fire, and there they shall remain.
28 On the Day We gather them all together, We shall say to those
who associate partners with God, ‘Stay in your place, you and your
a

Postponing judgement.

b

Angels.

10: 43

Jonah

131

partner-gods.’ Then We shall separate them, and their partner-gods
will say, ‘It was not us you worshipped–– 29 God is witness enough
between us and you–– we had no idea that you worshipped us.’
30 Every soul will realize, then and there, what it did in the past. They
will be returned to God, their rightful Lord, and their invented
[gods] will desert them.
31 Say [Prophet], ‘Who provides for you from the sky and the
earth? Who controls hearing and sight? Who brings forth the living
from the dead and the dead from the living, and who governs everything?’ They are sure to say, ‘God.’ Then say, ‘So why do you not
take heed of Him? 32 That is God, your Lord, the Truth. Apart from
the Truth, what is there except error? So how is it that you are
dissuaded?’ 33 In this way, your Lord’s word about those who defy
[the Truth] has been proved–– they do not believe. 34 Ask them, ‘Can
any of your partner-gods originate creation, then bring it back to life
again in the end?’ Say, ‘It is God that originates creation, and then
brings it back to life, so how can you be misled?’ 35 Say, ‘Can any of
your partner-gods show the way to the Truth?’ Say, ‘God shows the
way to the Truth. Is someone who shows the way to the Truth more
worthy to be followed, or someone who cannot ﬁnd the way unless
he himself is shown? What is the matter with you? How do you
judge?’ 36 Most of them follow nothing but assumptions, but assumptions can be of no value at all against the Truth: God is well aware of
what they do.
37 Nor could this Qur an have been devised by anyone other than
God. It is a conﬁrmation of what was revealed before it and an
explanation of the Scripture–– let there be no doubt about it–– it is
from the Lord of the Worlds. 38 Or do they say, ‘He has devised it’?
Say, ‘Then produce a sura like it, and call on anyone you can beside
God if you are telling the truth.’ 39 But they are denying what they
cannot comprehend–– its prophecy has yet to be fulﬁlled for them. In
the same way, those before them refused to believe–– see what was
the end of those evildoers!
40 Some of them believe in it, and some do not: your Lord knows
best those who cause corruption. 41 If they do not believe you,
[Prophet], say, ‘I act for myself, and you for yourselves. You are not
responsible for my actions nor am I responsible for yours.’ 42 Some of
them do listen to you: but can you make the deaf hear if they will not
use their minds? 43 Some of them look at you: but can you guide the

132

The Qur an

10: 44

blind if they will not see? 44 God does not wrong people at all–– it is
they who wrong themselves.
45 On the Day He gathers them together, it will be as if they have
stayed [in the world] no longer than a single hour, and they will
recognize one another. Those who denied the meeting with God will
be the losers, for they did not follow the right guidance. 46 Whether
We let you [Prophet] see some of the punishment We have threatened them with, or cause you to die [ﬁrst], they will return to Us:
God is witness to what they do. 47 Every community is sent a messenger, and when their messenger comes, a they will be judged justly;
they will not be wronged. 48 They ask, ‘When will this promise be
fulﬁlled, if what you say is true?’ 49 Say [Prophet], ‘I cannot control
any harm or beneﬁt that comes to me, except as God wills. There is
an appointed term for every community, and when it is reached they
can neither delay nor hasten it, even for a moment.’ 50 Say, ‘Think: if
His punishment were to come to you, during the night or day,
what part of it would the guilty wish to hasten? 51 Will you believe in
it, when it actually happens?’ It will be said, ‘Now [you believe],
when [before] you sought to hasten it?’ 52 It will be said to the evildoers, ‘Taste lasting punishment. Why should you be rewarded for
anything but what you did?’
53 They ask you [Prophet], ‘Is it true?’ Say, ‘Yes, by my Lord, it is
true, and you cannot escape it.’ 54 Every soul that has done evil, if it
possessed all that is on the earth, would gladly oﬀer it as ransom.
When they see the punishment, they will repent in secret, but they
will be judged with justice and will not be wronged. 55 It is to God
that everything in the heavens and the earth truly belongs: God’s
promise is true, but most people do not realize it. 56 It is He who gives
life and takes it, and you will all be returned to Him.
57 People, a teaching from your Lord has come to you, a healing for
what is in [your] hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
58 Say [Prophet], ‘In God’s grace and mercy let them rejoice: these
are better than all they accumulate.’ 59 Say, ‘Think about the provision
God has sent down for you, some of which you have made unlawful
and some lawful.’ b Say, ‘Has God given you permission [to do this],
or are you inventing lies about God?’ 60 What will those people who
a
b

At the Judgement. The messengers will bear witness, see 39: 69.
See 5: 103.

10: 74

Jonah

133

invent lies about Him think on the Day of Resurrection? God is
bountiful towards people, but most of them do not give thanks.
61 In whatever matter you [Prophet] may be engaged and whatever
part of the Qur an you are reciting, whatever work you [people] are
doing, We witness you when you are engaged in it. Not even the
weight of a speck of dust in the earth or sky escapes your Lord, nor
anything lesser or greater: it is all written in a clear record. 62 But for
those who are on God’s side there is no fear, nor shall they grieve.
63For those who believe and are conscious of God, 64 for them there is
good news in this life and in the Hereafter–– there is no changing the
promises of God–– that is truly the supreme triumph. 65 Do not let
their words grieve you [Prophet]. Power belongs entirely to God; He
hears all and knows all; 66 indeed, all who are in the heavens and on
the earth belong to Him. Those who call upon others beside God are
not really following partner-gods; they are only following assumptions and telling lies. 67 It is He who made the night so that you can
rest in it and the daylight so that you can see–– there truly are signs
in this for those who hear.
68 They say, ‘God has children!’ May He be exalted! He is the
Self-Suﬃcient One; everything in the heavens and the earth
belongs to Him. You have no authority to say this. How dare you say
things about God without any knowledge? 69 Say [Prophet], ‘Those
who invent lies about God will not prosper.’ 70 They may have
a little enjoyment in this world, but then they will return to Us.
Then We shall make them taste severe punishment for persisting in
blasphemy.
71 Tell them the story of Noah. He said to his people, ‘My people,
if my presence among you and my reminding you of God’s signs is
too much for you, then I put my trust in God. Agree on your course
of action, you and your partner-gods–– do not be hesitant or secretive about it–– then carry out your decision on me and give me no
respite. 72 But if you turn away, I have asked no reward from you; my
reward is with God alone, and I am commanded to be one of those
who devote themselves to Him.’ 73 But they rejected him. We saved
him and those with him on the Ark and let them survive; and We
drowned those who denied Our revelations–– see what was the end
of those who were forewarned!
74 Then, after him, We sent messengers to their peoples bringing
them clear signs. But they would not believe in anything they had

134

The Qur an

10: 75

already rejected: in this way We seal the hearts of those who are full
of hostility. 75 After them We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs
to Pharaoh and his leading supporters, but they acted arrogantly––
they were wicked people. 76 When the truth came to them from Us,
they said, ‘This is blatant sorcery.’ 77 Moses said, ‘Is this what you say
about the Truth when it comes to you? Is this sorcery? Sorcerers
never prosper.’ 78 They said, ‘Have you come to turn us away from
the faith we found our fathers following, so that you and your
brother can gain greatness in this land? We will never believe in you.’
79 And Pharaoh said, ‘Bring me every learned sorcerer.’ 80 When the
sorcerers came, Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever you
have.’ a 81 When they did so, Moses said, ‘Everything you have
brought is sorcery and God will show it to be false. God does not
make the work of mischief-makers right; 82 He will uphold the Truth
with His words, even if the evildoers hate it.’ 83 But no one believed
in Moses except a few of his own people, for fear that Pharaoh and
their leaders would persecute them: Pharaoh was domineering in the
land and prone to excess.
84 Moses said, ‘My people, if you have faith in God and are
devoted to Him, put your trust in Him.’ 85 They said, ‘We have put
our trust in God. Lord! Do not make us an object of persecution for
the oppressors. 86 Save us, in Your mercy, from those who reject
[Your message].’ 87 We revealed to Moses and his brother: ‘House
your people in Egypt and make these houses places of worship; keep
up the prayer; give good news to the believers!’ 88 And Moses said,
‘Our Lord, You have given Pharaoh and his chiefs splendour and
wealth in this present life and here they are, Lord, leading others
astray from Your path. Our Lord, obliterate their wealth and harden
their hearts so that they do not believe until they see the agonizing
torment.’ 89 God said, ‘Your prayers are answered, so stay on the
right course, and do not follow the path of those who do not know.’
90 We took the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh and his
troops pursued them in arrogance and aggression. But as he was
drowning he cried, ‘I believe there is no God except the one the
Children of Israel believe in. I submit to Him.’ 91 ‘Now? When you
had always been a rebel, and a troublemaker! 92 Today We shall save
only your corpse as a sign to all posterity. A great many people fail to
a

Your sticks or staﬀs–– see 20: 66–9.

10: 109

Jonah

135

heed Our signs.’ 93 We settled the Children of Israel in a good place
and provided good things as sustenance for them. It was only after
knowledge had come to them that they began to diﬀer among themselves. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their diﬀerences.
94 So if you [Prophet] are in doubt about what We have revealed to
you, ask those who have been reading the scriptures before you.
The Truth has come to you from your Lord, so be in no doubt
and do not deny God’s signs–– 95 then you would become one of the
losers. 96 Those against whom your Lord’s sentence is passed will
not believe, 97 even if every sign comes to them, until they see the
agonizing torment. 98 If only a single town had believed and beneﬁted from its belief ! Only Jonah’s people did so, and when they
believed, We relieved them of the punishment of disgrace in the life
of this world, and let them enjoy life for a time. 99 Had your Lord
willed, all the people on earth would have believed. So can you
[Prophet] compel people to believe? 100 No soul can believe except by
God’s will, and He brings disgrace on those who do not use their
reason. 101 Say, ‘Look at what is in the heavens and on the earth.’ But
what use are signs and warnings to people who will not believe?
102 What are they waiting for but the punishment that came to those
before them? Say, ‘Wait then, I am waiting too.’ 103 In the end We
shall save Our messengers and the believers. We take it upon Ourself
to save the believers.
104 [Prophet] say, ‘People, even if you are in doubt about my
religion, I do not worship those you worship other than God, but I
worship God who will cause you to die, and I am commanded to be a
believer.’ 105 [Prophet], set your face towards religion as a man of pure
faith. Do not be one of those who join partners with God; 106 do not
pray to any other [god] that can neither beneﬁt nor harm you: if you
do, you will be one of the evildoers. 107 If God inﬂicts harm on you,
no one can remove it but Him, and if He intends good for you, no
one can turn His bounty away; He grants His bounty to any of His
servants He will. He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
108 Say, ‘People, the Truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever
follows the right path follows it for his own good, and whoever strays
does so to his own loss: I am not your guardian.’ 109 [Prophet], follow
what is being revealed to you, and be steadfast until God gives His
judgement, for He is the Best of Judges.

11. HUD
A Meccan sura named after the prophet Hud whose story is given in verses 50–60.
It begins by announcing that the Prophet is sent both to warn and to give good
news, and the body of the sura focuses on the warning aspect: God watches over
everything and is aware of all that people do (verses 5–6, 111–12, 123). The
many stories of past prophets, which serve to warn the disbelievers, also
strengthen the heart of the Prophet (verse 120).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Ra
[This is] a Scripture whose verses are perfected, then set out clearly,
from One who is all wise, all aware. 2 [Say, Prophet], ‘Worship no one
but God. I am sent to you from Him to warn and to give good news.
3 Ask your Lord for forgiveness, then turn back to Him. He will
grant you wholesome enjoyment until an appointed time, and give
His grace to everyone who has merit. But if you turn away, I fear you
will have torment on a terrible Day: 4 it is to God that you will all
return, and He has power over everything.’
5 See how they [the disbelievers] wrap themselves up, to hide their
feelings from Him. But even when they cover themselves with their
clothes, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal: He knows
well the innermost secrets of the heart. 6 There is not a creature that
moves on earth whose provision is not His concern. He knows where
it lives and its [ﬁnal] resting place: it is all [there] in a clear record.
7 It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six Days a ––His
rule b extends over the waters c too––so as to test which of you does
best.
Yet [Prophet], if you say to them, ‘You will be resurrected after
death,’ the disbelievers are sure to answer, ‘This is clearly nothing
but sorcery.’ 8 If We defer their punishment for a determined time,
See also 22: 47; 32: 4; 41: 9 ﬀ.
‘Rule’ is one of the meanings of the Arabic word  arsh, normally translated as
‘throne’ (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).
c Cf. 21: 30.
a
b

11: 21

Hud

137

they are sure to say, ‘What is holding it back?’ But on the Day it
comes upon them, nothing will divert it from them; what they
mocked will be all around them. 9 How desperate and ungrateful
man becomes when We let him taste Our mercy and then withhold
it! 10 And if We let him taste mercy after some harm has touched him,
he is sure to say, ‘Misfortune has gone away from me.’ He becomes
exultant and boastful. 11 Not so those who are steadfast and do good
deeds: they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
12 So [Prophet] are you going to a abandon some part of what is
revealed to you, and let your heart be oppressed by it, because they
say, ‘Why is no treasure sent down to him? Why has no angel come
with him?’? You are only there to warn; it is God who is in charge of
everything. 13 If they say, ‘He has invented it himself,’ say, ‘Then
produce ten invented suras like it, and call in whoever you can beside
God, if you are truthful.’ 14 If they do not answer you, then you will
all know that it is sent down containing knowledge from God, and
that there is no god but Him. Then will you submit to Him? 15 If any
desire [only] the life of this world with all its ﬁnery, We shall repay
them in full in this life for their deeds–– they will be given no less––
16 but such people will have nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire:
their work here will be fruitless and their deeds futile. 17 Can they be
compared to those who have clear proof from their Lord, b recited
by a witness from Him, c and before it the Book of Moses, as a guide
and mercy? These people believe in it, whereas those groups that
deny its truth are promised the Fire. So have no doubt about it
[Prophet]: it is the Truth from your Lord, though most people do
not believe so.
18 Who could do more wrong than someone who invents lies about
God? Such people will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, ‘These are the ones that lied about their Lord.’ God’s
rejection is the due of those who do such wrong, 19 who hinder others
from God’s path, trying to make it crooked, and deny the life to
come. 20 They will not escape on earth, and there will be no one other
than God to protect them. Their punishment will be doubled. They
could not hear, and they did not see. 21 It is they who will have lost
Literally ‘Perhaps you will . . .’, but this is a challenging ﬁgure of speech.
The Qur an.
c The Angel Gabriel, see 4: 166.
a
b

138

The Qur an

11: 22

their souls, and what they invented will have deserted them. 22 There
is no doubt they will be the ones to lose most in the life to come.
23 But those who believed, did good deeds, and humbled themselves
before their Lord will be companions in Paradise and there they will
stay. 24 These two groups are like the blind and the deaf as compared
with those who can see and hear well: can they be alike? How can you
not take heed?
25 We sent Noah to his people to say, ‘I have come to you to give a
clear warning: 26 worship no one but God. I fear you will have torment on a painful Day.’ 27 But the prominent disbelievers among his
people said, ‘We can see that you are nothing but a mortal like
ourselves, and it is clear to see that only the vilest among us follow
you. We cannot see how you are any better than we are. In fact, we
think you are a liar.’ 28 He said, ‘My people, think: if I did have a clear
sign from my Lord, and He had given me grace of His own, though
it was hidden from you, could we force you to accept it against your
will? 29 My people, I ask no reward for it from you; my reward comes
only from God. I will not drive away the faithful: they are sure to
meet their Lord. I can see you are foolish. 30 My people, who could
help me against God if I drove the faithful away? Will you not take
heed? 31 I am not telling you that I hold God’s treasures, or have any
knowledge of what is hidden, or that I am an angel. Nor do I say that
God will not grant any good to those who are despised in your eyes:
God Himself knows best what is in their souls. If I did this I would
be one of the wrongdoers.’ 32 They said, ‘Noah! You have argued
with us for too long. Bring down on us the punishment you threaten
us with, if you are telling the truth.’ 33 He said, ‘It is God who will
bring it down, if He wishes, and you will not be able to escape. 34 My
advice will be no use to you if God wishes to leave you to your
delusions: He is your Lord and to Him you will be returned.’
35 If [these disbelievers] a say, ‘He has made this up,’ say
[Muhammad], ‘If I have made this up, I am responsible for my own
crime, but I am innocent of the crimes you commit.’
36 It was revealed to Noah, ‘None of your people will believe,
other than those who have already done so, so do not be distressed by,
what they do. 37 Build the Ark under Our [watchful] eyes and with
Our inspiration. Do not plead with Me for those who have done
a

In Mecca.

11: 50

Hud

139

evil–– they will be drowned.’ 38 So he began to build the Ark, and
whenever leaders of his people passed by, they laughed at him. He
said, ‘You may scorn us now, but we will come to scorn you: 39 you
will ﬁnd out who will receive a humiliating punishment, and on
whom a lasting suﬀering will descend.’ 40 When Our command came,
and water gushed up a out of the earth, We said, ‘Place on board this
Ark a pair of each species, and your own family–– except those
against whom the sentence has already been passed–– and those who
have believed,’ though only a few believed with him. 41 He said,
‘Board the Ark. In the name of God it shall sail and anchor. My God
is most forgiving and merciful.’ 42 It sailed with them on waves like
mountains, and Noah called out to his son, who stayed behind,
‘Come aboard with us, my son, do not stay with the disbelievers.’
43 But he replied, ‘I will seek refuge on a mountain to save me
from the water.’ Noah said, ‘Today there is no refuge from God’s
command, except for those on whom He has mercy.’ The waves cut
them oﬀ from each other and he was among the drowned.
44 Then it was said, ‘Earth, swallow up your water, and sky, hold
back,’ and the water subsided, the command was fulﬁlled. The Ark
settled on Mount Judi, and it was said, ‘Gone are those evildoing
people!’ 45 Noah called out to his Lord, saying, ‘My Lord, my son
was one of my family, though Your promise b is true, and You are the
most just of all judges.’ 46 God said, ‘Noah, he was not one of your
family. What he did was not right. Do not ask Me for things you
know nothing about. I am warning you not to be foolish.’ 47 He said,
‘My Lord, I take refuge with You from asking for things I know
nothing about. If You do not forgive me, and have mercy on me, I
shall be one of the losers.’ 48 And it was said, ‘Noah, descend in peace
from Us, with blessings on you and on some of the communities that
will spring from those who are with you. There will be others We
will allow to enjoy life for a time, but then a painful punishment from
Us will aﬄict them.’ 49 These accounts are part of what was beyond
your knowledge [Muhammad]. We revealed them to you. Neither
you nor your people knew them before now, so be patient: the future
belongs to those who are aware of God.
50 To the  Ad, We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My people,
a
b

Literally ‘the furnace boiled over’.
To save Noah’s family; see verse 40.

140

The Qur an

11: 51

worship God. You have no god other than Him; you are only making
up lies. 51 I ask no reward from you, my people; my reward comes
only from Him who created me. Why do you not use your reason?
52 My people, ask forgiveness from your Lord, and return to Him. He
will send down for you rain in abundance from the sky, and give you
extra strength. Do not turn away and be lost in your sins.’ 53 They
replied, ‘Hud, you have not brought us any clear evidence. We will
not forsake our gods on the strength of your word alone, nor will we
believe in you. 54 All we can say is that one of our gods may have
inﬂicted some harm on you.’ He said, ‘I call God to witness, and you
too are my witnesses, that I disown those you set up as partners with
God. 55 So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite. 56 I put
my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no moving
creature which He does not control. a My Lord’s way is straight.
57 But if you turn away, then I have conveyed the message with which
I was sent to you, and my Lord will bring along another people in
your place. You cannot do Him any harm: it is my Lord who protects
everything.’ 58 And so, when Our judgement came to pass, by Our
grace We saved Hud and his fellow believers. We saved them from a
severe punishment. 59 These were the  Ad: they rejected their Lord’s
signs, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command of
every obstinate tyrant. 60 They were rejected in this life and so
they shall be on the Day of Judgement. Yes, the  Ad denied their
Lord–– so away with the  Ad, the people of Hud!
61 To the Thamud, We sent their brother, Salih. He said, ‘My
people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. It was He
who brought you into being from the earth and made you inhabit it,
so ask forgiveness from Him, and turn back to Him: my Lord is near,
and ready to answer.’ 62 They said, ‘Salih, We used to have such great
hope in you. Will you forbid us to worship what our fathers worshipped? We are in grave doubt about what you are asking us to do.’
63 He said, ‘My people, just think: if I did have clear proof from my
Lord, and if He had given me mercy of His own, who could protect
me from God if I disobeyed Him? You would only make my loss
greater. 64 My people, this camel belongs to God, a sign for you, so
leave it to pasture on God’s earth and do not harm it, or you
will soon be punished.’ 65 But they hamstrung it, so he said, ‘Enjoy
a

Literally ‘grasp by its forelock’.

11: 81

Hud

141

life a for another three days: 66 this warning will not prove false.’ And
so, when Our command was fulﬁlled, by Our mercy We saved Salih
and his fellow believers from the disgrace of that day. [Prophet], it is
your Lord who is the Strong, the Mighty One. 67 The blast struck the
evildoers and they lay dead in their homes, 68 as though they had
never lived and ﬂourished there. Yes, the Thamud denied their
Lord–– so away with the Thamud!
69 To Abraham Our messengers brought good news. They said,
‘Peace.’ He answered, ‘Peace,’ and without delay he brought in a
roasted calf. 70 When he saw that their hands did not reach towards
the meal, he found this strange and became afraid of them. But they
said, ‘Do not be afraid. We have been sent against the people of Lot.’
71 His wife was standing [nearby] and laughed. We gave her good
news of Isaac and, after him, of Jacob. 72 She said, ‘Alas for me! How
am I to bear a child when I am an old woman, and my husband here
is an old man? That would be a strange thing!’ 73 They said, ‘Are you
astonished at what God ordains? The grace of God and His blessings
be upon you, people of this house! For He is worthy of all praise and
glory.’ 74 Then, when the fear left Abraham and the good news came
to him, he pleaded with Us for Lot’s people, 75 for Abraham was
forbearing, tender-hearted, and devout. 76 ‘Abraham, cease your
pleading: what your Lord has ordained has come about; punishment
is coming to them, which cannot be turned back.’
77 And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was anxious for
them, feeling powerless to protect them, and said, ‘This is a truly
terrible day!’ 78 His people came rushing towards him; they used to
commit foul deeds. He said, ‘My people, here are my daughters. b
They are more wholesome for you, so have some fear of God and do
not disgrace me with my guests. Is there not a single right-minded
man among you?’ 79 They said, ‘You know very well that we have no
right to your daughters. You know very well what we want.’ 80 He
said, ‘If only I had the strength to stop you or could rely on strong
support!’ 81 They [the messengers] said, ‘Lot, we are your Lord’s
messengers. They will not reach you. Leave with your household
in the dead of night, and let none of you turn back. Only your wife
a

Literally ‘continue to live in your homes’.
Some commentators interpret this to refer to the daughters of his people, rather
than the prophet’s own daughters.
b

142

The Qur an

11: 82

will suﬀer the fate that befalls the others. Their appointed time is the
morning: is the morning not near?’ 82 And so when what We had
ordained came about, We turned their town upside down and rained
down stones of baked clay on it, layer upon layer, 83 marked from
your Lord. It is not far from the evildoers. a
84 And to Midian, We sent their brother Shu ayb. He said, ‘My
people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. Do not give
short measure nor short weight. I see you are prospering, but I fear
you will have torment on an overwhelming Day. 85 My people, in
fairness, give full measure and weight. Do not withhold from people
things that are rightly theirs, and do not spread corruption in the
land. 86 What lasts with God is best for you, if you are believers: I am
not your keeper.’ 87 They said, ‘Shu ayb, does your prayer tell you
that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped and refrain
from doing whatever we please with our own property? Indeed you
are a tolerant and sensible man.’ 88 He answered, ‘My people, can you
not see? What if I am acting on clear evidence from my Lord? He
Himself has given me good provision: I do not want to do what I am
forbidding you to do, I only want to put things right as far as I can. I
cannot succeed without God’s help: I trust in Him, and always turn
to Him. 89 My people, do not let your opposition to me bring upon
you a similar fate to the peoples of Noah or Hud or Salih; the people
of Lot are not far away from you. b 90 Ask forgiveness from your Lord,
and turn to Him in repentance: my Lord is merciful and most
loving.’
91 They said, ‘Shu ayb, we do not understand much of what you
say, and we ﬁnd you very weak in our midst. But for your family, we
would have stoned you, for you have no great status among us.’ 92 He
said, ‘My people, is my family stronger in your estimation than God?
And have you put Him behind you? My Lord surrounds everything
you do. 93 My people, do whatever is within your power, and I will
do likewise. Soon you will know who will receive a disgraceful
punishment and who is a liar. Watch out, and so will I.’ 94 When what
We had ordained came about, in Our mercy We saved Shu ayb and
his fellow believers, but a mighty blast struck the wrongdoers. By
a This town is not far from the evildoers of Mecca, within their trading range (see
37: 137–8), nor is the punishment far from them.
b In time or place. See 7: 85; 7: 93.

11: 112

Hud

143

morning they lay dead in their homes, 95 as if they had never lived
and ﬂourished there. Yes, away with the people of Midian, just like
the Thamud!
96 We also sent Moses, with Our signs and clear authority, 97 to
Pharaoh and his supporters, but they followed Pharaoh’s orders, and
Pharaoh’s orders were misguided. 98 He will be at the forefront of his
people on the Day of Resurrection, leading them down towards the
Fire. What a foul drinking place to be led to! 99 They were pursued
by God’s rejection in this life and will be on the Day of Resurrection,
too. What a foul gift to be given!
100 We relate to you [Muhammad] such accounts of earlier towns:
some of them are still standing; some have been mown down; 101 We
did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. Their gods, which
they called on beside God, were no use to them when what your
Lord had ordained came about; they only increased their ruin.
102 Such is the punishment of your Lord for towns in the midst of
their sins: His punishment is terrible and severe. 103 There truly is a
sign in this for anyone who fears the punishment of the Hereafter.
That is a Day in which all people will be gathered together, a Day for
all to see. 104 We are delaying it only for a speciﬁed period, 105 and
when that Day comes, no soul will speak except by His permission,
and some of them will be wretched and some happy. 106 The
wretched ones will be in the Fire, sighing and groaning, 107 there to
remain for as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lord
wills otherwise: your Lord carries out whatever He wills. 108 As for
those who have been blessed, they will be in Paradise, there to
remain as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lord
wills otherwise–– an unceasing gift. a
109 [Prophet], have no doubt about what these people worship: it is
merely what their fathers worshipped before them, and We shall
certainly give them their share in full, without any reduction. 110 We
gave Moses the Scripture before you, but diﬀerences arose about it
and if it had not been for a prior word from your Lord, a decision
would already have been made between them, though they are in
grave doubt about it. 111 Your Lord will give everyone full due for
whatever they have done: He is aware of everything they do. 112 So
keep to the right course as you have been commanded, together with
a

Literally ‘uninterrupted giving’.

144

The Qur an

11: 113

those who have turned to God with you. Do not overstep the limits,
for He sees everything you do. 113 Do not rely on those who do evil, or
the Fire may touch you, and then you will have no one to protect you
from God, nor will you be helped.
114 [Prophet], keep up the prayer at both ends of the day, and
during parts of the night, for good things drive bad away–– this is a
reminder for those who are aware. 115 Be steadfast: God does not let
the rewards of those who do good go to waste. 116 If only there had
been, among the generations before your time, people with a remnant of good sense, to forbid corruption on the earth! We saved only
a few of them, while the unjust pursued the enjoyment of plenty, and
persisted in sin. 117 Your Lord would not destroy any town without
cause if its people were acting righteously. 118 If your Lord had
pleased, He would have made all people a single community, but they
continue to have their diﬀerences–– 119 except those on whom your
Lord has mercy–– for He created them to be this way, and the word
of your Lord is ﬁnal: ‘I shall deﬁnitely ﬁll Hell with both jinn and
men.’
120 So [Muhammad], We have told you the stories of the prophets
to make your heart ﬁrm and in these accounts truth has come to you,
as well as lessons and reminders for the believers. 121 Say to those who
do not believe, ‘Do whatever you can: we too are doing what we can,’
122 and ‘Wait: we too are waiting.’ 123 All that is hidden in the heavens
and earth belongs to God, and all authority a goes back to Him. So
[Prophet], worship Him, and put your trust in Him: your Lord is
never unaware of what you [people] are doing.
a

Or ‘all things’.

12. JOSEPH
A Meccan sura dealing primarily with the story of Joseph, but framed
by a three-verse introduction about the Qur an and a ten-verse epilogue
about the Meccans’ response, the punishment met by earlier disbelievers, and
encouragement for the Prophet.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear––2 We
have sent it down as an Arabic Qur an so that you [people] may
understand.
3 We tell you [Prophet] the best of stories in revealing this Qur an
to you. a Before this b you were one of those who knew nothing about
them. 4 Joseph said to his father, ‘Father, I dreamed of eleven stars
and the sun and the moon: I saw them all bow down before me,’ 5 and
he replied, ‘My son, tell your brothers nothing of this dream, or they
may plot to harm you––Satan is man’s sworn enemy. 6 This is about
how your Lord will choose you, teach you to interpret dreams, and
perfect His blessing on you and the House of Jacob, just as He
perfected it earlier on your forefathers Abraham and Isaac: your
Lord is all knowing and wise.’
7 There are lessons in the story of Joseph and his brothers for all
who seek them. 8 The brothers said [to each other], ‘Although we are
many, Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are––
our father is clearly in the wrong.’ 9 [One of them said], ‘Kill Joseph
or banish him to another land, and your father’s attention will be free
to turn to you. After that you can be righteous.’ 10 [Another of them]
said, ‘Do not kill Joseph, but, if you must, throw him into the hidden
depths of a well where some caravan may pick him up.’
11 They said to their father, ‘Why do you not trust us with Joseph?
We wish him well. 12 Send him with us tomorrow and he will enjoy
a Many translators add ‘though’ (‘. . . to you, though before this . . .’), thinking that
in is conditional, when in fact it is for emphasis here, as conﬁrmed by the emphatic lam
following it.
b Cf. 11: 49 and 42: 52.

146

The Qur an

12: 13

himself and play–– we will take good care of him.’ 13 He replied, ‘The
thought of you taking him away with you worries me: I am afraid a
wolf may eat him when you are not paying attention.’ 14 They said,
‘If a wolf were to eat him when there are so many of us, we would
truly be losers!’
15 Then they took him away with them, resolved upon throwing
him into the hidden depths of a well–– We inspired him, saying, ‘You
will tell them of all this [at a time] when they do not realize [who you
are]!’–– 16 and at nightfall they returned to their father weeping.
17 They said, ‘We went oﬀ racing one another, leaving Joseph behind
with our things, and a wolf ate him. You will not believe us, though
we are telling the truth!’ 18 and they showed him his shirt, deceptively stained with blood. He cried, ‘No! Your souls have prompted
you to do wrong! But it is best to be patient: from God alone I seek
help to bear what you are saying.’
19 Some travellers came by. They sent someone to draw water and
he let down his bucket. ‘Good news!’ he exclaimed. ‘Here is a boy!’
They hid him like a piece of merchandise–– God was well aware of
what they did–– 20 and then sold him for a small price, for a few pieces
of silver: so little did they value him.
21 The Egyptian who bought him said to his wife, ‘Look after him
well! He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son.’ In this
way We settled Joseph in that land and later taught him how to
interpret dreams: God always prevails in His purpose, though most
people do not realize it.
22 When he reached maturity, We gave him judgement and knowledge: this is how We reward those who do good. 23 The woman in
whose house he was living tried to seduce him: she bolted the doors
and said, ‘Come to me,’ and he replied, ‘God forbid! My master has
been good to me; wrongdoers never prosper.’ 24 She made for him,
and he would have succumbed to her if he had not seen evidence of
his Lord–– We did this in order to keep evil and indecency away from
him, for he was truly one of Our chosen servants. 25 They raced for
the door–– she tore his shirt from behind–– and at the door they met
her husband. She said, ‘What, other than prison or painful punishment, should be the reward of someone who tried to dishonour your
wife?’ 26 but he said, ‘She tried to seduce me.’ A member of her
household suggested, ‘If his shirt is torn at the front, then it is she
who is telling the truth and he who is lying, 27 but if it is torn at the

12: 40

Joseph

147

back, then she is lying and he is telling the truth.’ 28 When the husband saw that the shirt was torn at the back, he said, ‘This is another
instance of women’s treachery: your treachery is truly great.
29 Joseph, overlook this; but you [wife], ask forgiveness for your sin––
you have done wrong.’
30 Some women of the city said, ‘The governor’s wife is trying to
seduce her slave! Love for him consumes her heart! It is clear to us
that she has gone astray.’ 31 When she heard their malicious talk, she
prepared a banquet and sent for them, giving each of them a knife.
She said to Joseph, ‘Come out and show yourself to them!’ and when
the women saw him, they were stunned by his beauty, and cut their
hands, exclaiming, ‘Great God! He cannot be mortal! He must be a
precious angel!’ 32 She said, ‘This is the one you blamed me for. I
tried to seduce him and he wanted to remain chaste, but if he does
not do what I command now, he will be put in prison and degraded.’
33 Joseph said, ‘My Lord! I would prefer prison to what these women
are calling me to do. If You do not protect me from their treachery,
I shall yield to them and do wrong,’ 34 and his Lord answered
his prayer and protected him from their treachery–– He is the All
Hearing, the All Knowing.
35 In the end they a thought it best, after seeing all the signs of
his innocence, that they should imprison him for a while. 36 Two
young men went into prison alongside him. One of them said, ‘I
dreamed that I was pressing grapes’; the other said, ‘I dreamed that
I was carrying bread on my head and that the birds were eating it.’
[They said], ‘Tell us what this means–– we can see that you are a
knowledgeable b man.’
37 He said, ‘I can tell you what this means before any meal arrives:
this is part of what my Lord has taught me. I reject the faith of those
who disbelieve in God and deny the life to come, 38 and I follow the
faith of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Because of God’s
grace to us and to all mankind, we would never worship anything
beside God, but most people are ungrateful. 39 Fellow prisoners,
would many diverse gods be better than God the One, the All
Powerful? [No indeed!] 40 All those you worship instead of Him
are mere names you and your forefathers have invented, names for
a
b

The governor and his household.
Razi gives this interpretation of muhsinin.

148

The Qur an

12: 41

which God has sent down no sanction. Authority belongs to God
alone, and He orders you to worship none but Him: this is the true
faith, though most people do not realize it. 41 Fellow prisoners, one of
you will serve his master with wine; the other will be cruciﬁed and the
birds will peck at his head. That is the end of the matter on which
you asked my opinion.’ 42 Joseph said to the one he knew would be
saved, ‘Mention me to your master,’ but Satan made him forget to do
this, and so Joseph remained in prison for a number of years.
43 The king said, ‘I dreamed about seven fat cows being eaten by
seven lean ones; seven green ears of corn and [seven] others
withered. Counsellors, if you can interpret dreams, tell me the meaning of my dream.’ 44 They said, ‘These are confusing dreams and we
are not skilled at dream-interpretation,’ 45 but the prisoner who had
been freed at last remembered [Joseph] and said, ‘I shall tell you
what this means. Give me leave to go.’
46 ‘Truthful Joseph! Tell us the meaning of seven fat cows being
eaten by seven lean ones, seven green ears of corn and [seven] others
withered, 47 then I can return to the people to inform them.’ Joseph
said, ‘You will sow for seven consecutive years as usual. Store all that
you reap, left in the ear, apart from the little you eat. 48 After that will
come seven years of hardship which will consume all but a little of
what you stored up for them; 49 after that will come a year when the
people will have abundant rain and will press grapes.’
50 The king said, ‘Bring him to me,’ but when the messenger came
to fetch Joseph, he said, ‘Go back to your master and ask him about
what happened to those women who cut their hands–– my Lord
knows all about their treachery.’ 51 The king asked the women, ‘What
happened when you tried to seduce Joseph?’ They said, ‘God forbid!
We know nothing bad of him!’ and the governor’s wife said, ‘Now
the truth is out: it was I who tried to seduce him–– he is an honest
man.’ 52 [Joseph said, ‘This was] for my master to know that I did not
betray him behind his back: God does not guide the mischief of the
treacherous. 53 I do not pretend to be blameless, for man’s very soul
incites him to evil unless my Lord shows mercy: He is most forgiving, most merciful.’
54 The king said, ‘Bring him to me: I will have him serve me
personally,’ and then, once he had spoken with him, ‘From now on
you will have our trust and favour.’ 55 Joseph said, ‘Put me in charge
of the nation’s storehouses: I shall manage them prudently and care-

12: 69

Joseph

149

fully.’ 56 In this way We settled Joseph in that land to live wherever he
wished: We grant Our mercy to whoever We will and do not fail to
reward those who do good. 57 The reward of the Hereafter is best for
those who believe and are mindful of God.
58 Joseph’s brothers came and presented themselves before him.
He recognized them–– though they did not recognize him–– 59 and
once he had given them their provisions, he said, ‘Bring me the
brother [you left with] your father! a Have you not seen me giving
generous measure and being the best of hosts? 60 You will have no
more corn from me if you do not bring him to me, and you will not
be permitted to approach me.’ 61 They said, ‘We shall do all we can to
persuade his father to send him with us, indeed we shall.’ 62 Joseph
said to his servants, ‘Put their [traded] goods back into their saddlebags, so that they may recognize them when they go back to their
family, and [be eager to] return.’
63 When they returned to their father, they said, ‘Father, we have
been denied any more corn, but send our brother back with us and
we shall be given another measure. We shall guard him carefully.’
64 He said, ‘Am I to entrust him to you as I did his brother before?
God is the best guardian and the Most Merciful of the merciful.’
65 Then, when they opened their packs, they discovered that their
goods had been returned to them and they said, ‘Father! We need no
more [goods to barter]: b look, our goods have been returned to us.
We shall get corn for our household; we shall keep our brother safe;
we shall be entitled to another camel-load of grain–– an extra measure so easily achieved!’ 66 He said, ‘I will never send him with you,
not unless you swear by God that you will bring him back to me if
that is humanly possible.’ c Then, when they had given him their
pledge, he said, ‘Our words are entrusted to God.’ 67 He said, ‘My
sons, do not enter all by one gate–– use diﬀerent gates. But I cannot
help you against the will of God: all power is in God’s hands. I trust
in Him; let everyone put their trust in Him,’ 68 and, when they
entered as their father had told them, it did not help them against
the will of God, it merely satisﬁed a wish of Jacob’s. He knew well
what We had taught him, though most people do not.
69 Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew
a

Or a paternal half-brother (Benjamin).
This understanding of the phrase ma nabghi is supported by Razi.
c Literally ‘unless you are totally surrounded’. Razi suggests by death or the enemy.
b

150

The Qur an

12: 70

his brother apart a and said, ‘I am your brother, so do not be saddened
by their past actions,’ 70 and, once he had given them their provisions,
he placed the drinking-cup in his brother’s pack. A man called out,
‘People of the caravan! You are thieves!’ 71 and they turned and said,
‘What have you lost?’ 72 They replied, ‘The king’s drinking-cup is
missing,’ and, ‘Whoever returns it will get a camel-load [of grain],’
and, ‘I give you my word.’ 73 They said, ‘By God! You must know
that we did not come to make mischief in your land: we are no
thieves.’ 74 They asked them, ‘And if we ﬁnd that you are lying, what
penalty shall we apply to you?’ 75 and they answered, ‘The penalty
will be [the enslavement of] the person in whose bag the cup is
found: this is how we punish wrongdoers.’ 76 [Joseph] began by
searching their bags, then his brother’s, and he pulled it out from his
brother’s bag.
In this way We devised a plan for Joseph–– if God had not willed it
so, he could not have detained his brother as a penalty under the
king’s law–– We raise the rank of whoever We will. Above everyone
who has knowledge there is the One who is all knowing.
77 [His brothers] said, ‘If he is a thief then his brother was a thief
before him,’ but Joseph kept his secrets and did not reveal anything
to them. He said, ‘You are in a far worse situation. God knows best
the truth of what you claim.’ 78 They said, ‘Mighty governor, he has
an elderly father. Take one of us in his place. We can see that you are
a very good man.’ 79 He replied, ‘God forbid that we should take
anyone other than the person on whom we found our property: that
would be unjust of us.’ 80 When they lost hope of [persuading] him,
they withdrew to confer with each other: the eldest of them said, ‘Do
you not remember that your father took a solemn pledge from you in
the name of God and before that you failed in your duty with regard
to Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father gives me leave or
God decides for me–– He is the best decider–– 81 so go back to your
father and say, “Your son stole. We can only tell you what we saw.
How could we guard against the unforeseen? 82 Ask in the town
where we have been; ask the people of the caravan we travelled with:
we are telling the truth.”’
a Literally ‘accommodated him’ or ‘took him as a guest’. Some interpret this as
suggesting that the brothers were oﬀered lodgings in pairs and Benjamin, as the odd one
out, was given lodging with Joseph; another suggestion is that the two full brothers
dined together: either way the sense is that Joseph drew Benjamin apart from the others.

12: 100

Joseph

151

83 Their father said, ‘No! Your souls have prompted you to do
wrong! But it is best to be patient: may God bring all of them a back
to me–– He alone is the All Knowing, the All Wise,’ 84 and he turned
away from them, saying, ‘Alas for Joseph!’ His eyes went white
with grief and he was ﬁlled with sorrow. 85 They said, ‘By God! You
will ruin your health if you do not stop thinking of Joseph, or even
die.’ 86 He said, ‘I plead my grief and sorrow before God. I have
knowledge from God that you do not have. 87 My sons, go and seek
news of Joseph and his brother and do not despair of God’s mercy––
only disbelievers despair of God’s mercy.’
88 Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, they said,
‘Mighty governor, misfortune has aﬄicted us and our family. We
have brought only a little merchandise, but give us full measure. Be
charitable to us: God rewards the charitable.’ 89 He said, ‘Do you now
realize what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were ignorant?’ 90 and they cried, ‘Could it be that you are Joseph?’ He said, ‘I
am Joseph. This is my brother. God has been gracious to us: God
does not deny anyone who is mindful of God and steadfast in adversity the rewards of those who do good.’ 91 They said, ‘By God! God
really did favour you over all of us and we were in the wrong!’ 92 but
he said, ‘You will hear no reproaches today. May God forgive you:
He is the Most Merciful of the merciful. 93 Take my shirt and lay it
over my father’s face: he will recover his sight. Then bring your
whole family back to me.’
94 Later, when the caravan departed, their father said, ‘You may
think I am senile but I can smell Joseph,’ 95 but [people] said, ‘By
God! You are still lost in that old illusion of yours!’ 96 Then, when the
bearer of good news came and placed the shirt on to Jacob’s face, his
eyesight returned and he said, ‘Did I not tell you that I have knowledge from God that you do not have?’ 97 The [brothers] said,
‘Father, ask God to forgive our sins–– we were truly in the wrong.’
98 He replied, ‘I shall ask my Lord to forgive you: He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’
99 Later, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew
his parents to him–– he said, ‘Welcome to Egypt: you will all be safe
here, God willing’–– 100 and took them up to [his] throne. They all
bowed down before him and he said, ‘Father, this is the fulﬁlment of
a

Razi suggests Joseph, Benjamin, and the eldest son who remained in Egypt.

152

The Qur an

12: 101

that dream I had long ago. My Lord has made it come true and has
been gracious to me–– He released me from prison and He brought
you here from the desert–– after Satan sowed discord between me
and my brothers. My Lord is most subtle in achieving what He will;
He is the All Knowing, the Truly Wise. 101 My Lord! You have given
me authority; You have taught me something about the interpretation of dreams; Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my
protector in this world and in the Hereafter. Let me die in true
devotion to You. Join me with the righteous.’
102 This account is part of what was beyond your knowledge
[Muhammad]. We revealed it to you: you were not present with
Joseph’s brothers when they made their treacherous plans. 103 However eagerly you may want them to, most men will not believe. 104 You
ask no reward from them for this: it is a reminder for all people
105 and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth that they
pass by and give no heed to–– 106 most of them will only believe in
God while also joining others with Him. 107 Are they so sure that an
overwhelming punishment from God will not fall on them, or that
the Last Hour will not come upon them suddenly when they least
expect it? 108 Say, ‘This is my way: based on clear evidence, I, and all
who follow me, call [people] to God–– glory be to God!–– I do not
join others with Him.’
109 All the messengers We sent before you [Muhammad] were men
to whom We made revelations, men chosen from the people of their
towns. Have the [disbelievers] not travelled through the land and
seen the end of those who went before them? For those who are
mindful of God, the Home in the Hereafter is better. Do you
[people] not use your reason? 110 When the messengers lost all hope
and realized that they had been dismissed as liars, Our help came to
them: We saved whoever We pleased, but Our punishment will not
be turned away from guilty people. 111 There is a lesson in the stories
of such people for those who understand. This revelation is no fabrication: it is a conﬁrmation of the truth of what was sent before it; an
explanation of everything; a a guide and a blessing for those who
believe.
a There are two interpretations of this phrase: (i) ‘everything to do with the story of
Joseph’; and (ii) ‘everything to do with religion’.

13. THUNDER
A Medinan sura that takes its title from the thunder that praises God in verse
13. The sura is distinguished by its moving description of God’s power and
knowledge. Muhammad’s place in a long tradition of prophets, none of whom
could produce miracles on request, is stressed, and his role emphasized: it is only
to deliver the message. God is the One who will call people to account for their
deeds, and He is the witness for the truth of the message.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim Ra
These are the signs of the Scripture. What your Lord has sent down
to you [Prophet] is the truth, yet most people do not believe. 2 It is
God who raised up the heavens with no visible supports and then
established Himself on the throne; He has subjected the sun and the
moon each to pursue its course for an appointed time; He regulates
all things, and makes the revelations clear so that you may be certain
of meeting your Lord; 3 it is He who spread out the earth, placed
ﬁrm mountains and rivers on it, and made two of every kind of fruit;
He draws the veil of night over the day. There truly are signs in this
for people who reﬂect. 4 There are, in the land, neighbouring plots,
gardens of vineyards, cornﬁelds, palm trees in clusters or otherwise,
all watered with the same water, yet We make some of them taste
better than others: there truly are signs in this for people who reason.
5 If anything can amaze you [Prophet], then you should surely be
amazed at their asking, ‘What? When we become dust, shall we be
created anew?’ These are the ones who deny their Lord, who will
wear iron collars around their necks and be the inhabitants of the
Fire, there to remain. 6 They ask you to bring on the punishment
rather than any promised rewards, though there have been many
examples before them––your Lord is full of forgiveness for people,
despite their wrongdoing, but He is truly severe in punishment.
7 The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to him
from his Lord?’ But you are only there to give warning: [earlier]
communities each had their guide.

154

The Qur an

13: 8

8 God knows what every female bears and how much their wombs
shrink or swell–– everything has its measure with Him; 9 He knows
what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is the Great, the Most
High. 10 It makes no diﬀerence whether any of you speak secretly or
aloud, whether you are hiding under cover of night or walking about
in the day: 11 each person has guardian angels before him and behind,
watching over him by God’s command. God does not change the
condition of a people [for the worse] a unless they change what is in
themselves, but if He wills harm on a people, no one can ward it oﬀ––
apart from Him, they have no protector.
12 It is He who shows you the lightning, inspiring fear and
hope; He builds up the clouds heavy with rain; 13 the thunder
sounds His praises, as do the angels in awe of Him; He sends
thunderbolts to strike whoever He will. Yet still they dispute about
God–– He has mighty plans. 14 The only true prayer is to Him:
those they pray to besides Him give them no answer any more than
water reaches the mouth of someone who simply stretches out his
hands for it–– it cannot do so: the prayers of the disbelievers are all
in vain. 15 All that are in heaven and earth submit b to God alone,
willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the mornings and in
the evenings.
16 Say [Prophet], ‘Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth?’ Say,
‘God.’ Say, ‘Why do you take protectors other than Him, who can
neither beneﬁt nor harm even themselves?’ Say, ‘Are the blind equal
to those who can see? And are the depths of darkness equal to the
light?’ Have the partners they assign to God created anything like
His creation so that their creation is indistinguishable from His? Say,
‘God is the Creator of all things: He is the One, the All Compelling.’
17 He sends water from the sky that ﬁlls riverbeds to overﬂowing,
each according to its measure. The stream carries on its surface a
growing layer of froth, like the froth that appears when people melt
metals in the ﬁre to make ornaments and tools: in this way God
illustrates truth and falsehood–– the froth disappears, but what is of
beneﬁt to man stays behind–– this is how God makes illustrations.
18 There will be the best of rewards for those who respond to their
Lord; those who do not respond would willingly give away the
Cf. 8: 53; 16: 112.
Or ‘prostrate’: shadows submit to God’s laws in nature and also stretch out on the
ground as if prostrating. Sajada has both meanings.
a
b

13: 31

Thunder

155

earth’s contents twice over, if they had it, in order to ransom themselves, so terrible will be their reckoning. Hell will be their home,
and their bed wretched.
19 Can someone who knows that the revelation from your Lord is
the Truth be equal to someone who is blind? Only those with understanding will take it to heart; 20 those who fulﬁl the agreements they
make in God’s name and do not break their pledges; 21 who join
together what God commands to be joined; who are in awe of their
Lord and fear the harshness of the Reckoning; 22 who remain steadfast through their desire for the face of their Lord; who keep up the
prayer; who give secretly and openly from what We have provided for
them; who repel evil with good. These will have the reward of the
[true] home: 23 they will enter perpetual Gardens, along with their
righteous ancestors, spouses, and descendants; the angels will go in
to them from every gate, 24 ‘Peace be with you, because you have
remained steadfast. What an excellent reward is this home of yours!’
25 But there will be rejection for those who break their conﬁrmed
agreements made in God’s name, who break apart what God has
commanded to be joined and who spread corruption on earth: theirs
is the dreadful home–– 26 God gives abundantly to whoever He will,
and sparingly to whoever He will–– and though they may revel in the
life of this world, it is but a ﬂeeting comfort compared with the Life
to come.
27 The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to
him from his Lord?’ [Prophet], say, ‘God leaves whoever He will to
stray, and guides to Himself those who turn towards Him, 28 those
who have faith and whose hearts ﬁnd peace in the remembrance
of God–– truly it is in the remembrance of God that hearts ﬁnd
peace–– 29 those who believe and do righteous deeds: joy awaits these,
and their ﬁnal homecoming will be excellent.’ 30 So We have sent you
[Prophet] to a community–– other communities passed away long
before them–– to recite to them what We reveal to you. Yet they
disbelieve in the Lord of Mercy. Say, ‘He is my Lord: there is no god
but Him. I put my trust in Him and to Him is my return.’ 31 If there
were ever to be a Qur an with which mountains could be moved, the
earth shattered, or the dead made to speak [it would have been this
one], a but everything is truly in God’s hands. Do the believers not
a

Or ‘[they still would not believe]’.

156

The Qur an

13: 32

realize that if God had so willed, He could have guided all mankind?
As for the disbelievers, because of their misdeeds, disaster will not
cease to aﬄict them or fall close to their homes until God’s promise
is fulﬁlled: God never fails to keep His promise.
32 Many messengers before you [Muhammad] were mocked, but I
granted respite to the disbelievers: in the end, I took them to task––
how terrible My punishment was! 33 Is He who stands over every soul
marking its action [in need of any partner]? Yet they ascribe partners
to God. Say, ‘Name them,’ or, ‘Can you tell Him about something
on the earth He does not know to exist, or is this just a display of
words?’ But the things they devise are made alluring to the disbelievers and they are barred from the [right] path: no one can guide
those God leaves to stray. 34 There is a punishment for them in this
world, but the punishment of the Hereafter will be harder–– no one
will defend them against God.
35 Here is a picture of the Garden that those mindful of God have
been promised: ﬂowing streams and perpetual food and shade. This
is the reward that awaits those who are mindful of God; the disbelievers’ reward is the Fire. 36 Those to whom We sent the Scripture
rejoice in what has been revealed to you [Prophet]; some factions
deny parts of it. Say, ‘I am commanded to worship God, and not join
anything with Him in worship: to Him I call [others] and to Him I
shall return.’ 37 So We have sent down the Qur an to give judgement
in the Arabic language. If you were to follow their desires, after the
knowledge that has come to you, you would have no one to guard you
or protect you from God. 38 We sent messengers before you and gave
them wives and oﬀspring; no messenger was given the power to
produce a miracle except with God’s permission. There was a Scripture for every age: a 39 God erases or conﬁrms whatever He will, and
the source of Scripture is with Him. 40 Whether We let you [Prophet]
see part of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die [before
that], your duty is only to deliver the message: the Reckoning is
Ours. 41 Do they not see how We come to [their] land and shrink its
borders? God decides–– no one can reverse His decision–– and He is
swift in reckoning. 42 Those before them also schemed, but the overall scheme belongs to God: He knows what each soul does. In the
end, the disbelievers will ﬁnd out who will have the excellent home.
a

Another interpretation is ‘there is a time decreed for everything’.

13: 43

Thunder

157

43 They say, ‘You have not been sent.’ Say, ‘God is suﬃcient witness
between me and you: all knowledge of the Scripture comes from
Him.’ a
a Alternatively, ‘God–
– and those who have [true] knowledge of the Scripture–– are
suﬃcient witness between us.’

14. ABRAHAM
A Meccan sura named after Abraham (verses 35–41), who prays to God that
Mecca may be made prosperous so that its people may be thankful and continue
to worship God. The ungrateful are condemned, and the grateful commended,
throughout the sura. Abraham also asks that he and his descendants may be
protected from idol-worship. This serves to remind the Meccans that they
should shun the worship of idols.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Ra
This is a Scripture which We have sent down to you [Prophet] so
that, with their Lord’s permission, you may bring people from the
depths of darkness into light, to the path of the Almighty, the
Praiseworthy One, 2 God, to whom everything in the heavens and
earth belongs. How terrible will be the torment of those who ignore
[Him], 3 those who prefer the life of this world over the life to come,
who turn others from God’s way, trying to make it crooked: such
people have gone far astray. 4 We have never sent a messenger who
did not use his own people’s language to make things clear for them.
But still God leaves whoever He will to stray, and guides whoever He
will: He is the Almighty, the All Wise.
5 We sent Moses with Our signs: ‘Bring out your people from the
depths of darkness into light. Remind them of the Days of God: a
there truly are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person.’
6 And so Moses said to his people, ‘Remember God’s blessing on you
when He saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were inﬂicting
terrible suﬀering on you, slaughtering your sons and sparing only
your women––that was a severe test from your Lord! 7 Remember
that He promised, “If you are thankful, I will give you more, but
if you are thankless, My punishment is terrible indeed.” ’ 8 And
Moses said, ‘Even if you, together with everybody else on earth, are
thankless, God is self-suﬃcient, worthy of all praise.’
a The times when God singled them out for special favour or tribulation (cf.
2: 30–61).

14: 22

Abraham

159

9 Have you not heard about those who went before you, the people
of Noah,  Ad, Thamud, and those who lived after them, known only
to God? Their messengers came to them with clear proof, but they
tried to silence them, a saying, ‘We do not believe the message with
which you were sent. We have disturbing doubts about what you are
asking us to do.’ 10 Their messengers answered, ‘Can there be any
doubt about God, the Creator of the heavens and earth? He calls you
to Him in order to forgive you your sins and let you enjoy your life
until the appointed hour.’ But they said, ‘You are only men like us.
You want to turn us away from what our forefathers used to worship.
Bring us clear proof then, [if you can].’ 11 Their messengers
answered, ‘True, we are only men like you, but God favours whichever of His servants He chooses. We cannot bring you any proof
unless God permits it, so let the believers put all their trust in Him––
12 why should we not put our trust in God when it is He who has
guided us to this way we follow? We shall certainly bear steadfastly
whatever harm you do to us. Let anyone who trusts, trust in God.’
13 The disbelievers said to their messengers, ‘We shall expel you
from our land unless you return to our religion.’ But their Lord
inspired the messengers: ‘We shall destroy the evildoers, 14 and leave
you to dwell in the land after them. This reward is for those who are
in awe of meeting Me, and of My warnings.’ 15 They asked God to
decide, and every obstinate tyrant failed–– 16 Hell awaits each one; he
will be given foul water to drink, 17 which he will try to gulp but
scarcely be able to swallow; death will encroach on him from every
side, but he will not die; more intense suﬀering will lie ahead of him.
18 The deeds of those who reject their Lord are like ashes that the
wind blows furiously on a stormy day: they have no power over
anything they have gained. This is to stray far, far away.
19 [Prophet], do you not see that God created the heavens and the
earth for a purpose? He could remove all of you and replace you with
a new creation if He wished to: 20 that is not diﬃcult for God.
21 When they all appear before Him, the weak will say to the powerseekers, ‘We were your followers. Can you protect us from any of
God’s punishment?’ They will reply, ‘If God had guided us, we
would have guided you. It makes no diﬀerence now whether we rage
or endure with patience: there is no escape.’ 22 When everything has
a

Literally ‘they pushed their hands into the prophets’ mouths’.

160

The Qur an

14: 23

been decided, Satan will say, ‘God gave you a true promise. I too
made promises but they were false ones: I had no power over you
except to call you, and you responded to my call, so do not blame
me; blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I
reject the way you associated me with God before.’ A bitter torment
awaits such wrongdoers, 23 but those who believed and did good
deeds will be brought into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams,
there to remain with their Lord’s permission: their greeting there is
‘Peace’.
24 [Prophet], do you not see how God makes comparisons? A good
word is like a good tree whose root is ﬁrm and whose branches are
high in the sky, 25 yielding constant fruit by its Lord’s leave–– God
makes such comparisons for people so that they may reﬂect–– 26 but
an evil word is like a rotten tree, uprooted from the surface of the
earth, with no power to endure. 27 God will give ﬁrmness to those
who believe in the ﬁrmly rooted word, a both in this world and the
Hereafter, but the evildoers He leaves to stray: God does whatever
He will.
28 [Prophet], do you not see those who, in exchange for God’s
favour, oﬀer only ingratitude and make their people end up in the
home of ruin, Hell, 29 where they burn? What an evil place to stay!
30 They set up [false deities] as God’s equals to lead people astray
from His path. Say, ‘Take your pleasure now, for your destination is
the Fire.’ 31 Tell My servants who have believed to keep up the
prayer and give, secretly and in public, out of what We have provided
them, before a Day comes when there will be no trading or
friendship.
32 It is God who created the heavens and earth, who has sent down
water from the sky and with it brought forth produce to nourish you;
He has made ships useful to you, sailing the sea by His command,
and the rivers too; 33 He has made the sun and the moon useful to
you, steady on their paths; He has made the night and day useful to
you 34 and given you some of everything you asked Him for. If you
tried to count God’s favours you could never calculate them: man is
truly unjust and ungrateful.
35 Remember when Abraham said, ‘Lord, make this town safe!
Preserve me and my oﬀspring from idolatry, 36 Lord, the [idols] have
a

Possibly the Scripture, ﬁrmly rooted in knowledge from God.

14: 52

Abraham

161

led many people astray! Anyone who follows me is with me, but as
for anyone who disobeys me–– You are surely forgiving and merciful.
37 Our Lord, I have established some of my oﬀspring in an
uncultivated valley, close to Your Sacred House, Lord, so that they
may keep up the prayer. Make people’s hearts turn to them, and
provide them with produce, so that they may be thankful. 38 Our
Lord, You know well what we conceal and what we reveal: nothing at
all is hidden from God, on earth or in heaven. 39 Praise be to God,
who has granted me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age: my Lord hears
all requests! 40 Lord, grant that I and my oﬀspring may keep up the
prayer. Our Lord, accept my request. 41 Our Lord, forgive me, my
parents, and the believers on the Day of Reckoning.’
42 Do not think [Prophet] that God is unaware of what the disbelievers a do: He only gives them respite until a Day when their eyes
will stare in terror. 43 They will rush forward, craning their necks,
unable to divert their eyes, a gaping void in their hearts. 44 So warn
people of the Day when punishment will come to them, and when
the disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, give us a little more time: we
shall answer Your call and follow the messengers.’ Did you [disbelievers] not swear in the past that your power would have no end?
45 You lived in the same places as others who wronged themselves
before, and you were clearly shown how We dealt with them–– We
gave you many examples. 46 They made their plots, but, even if their
plots had been able to move mountains, God had the answer.
47 So do not think [Prophet] that God will break His promise to
His messengers: He is mighty, and capable of retribution. 48 One
Day–– when the earth is turned into another earth, the heavens into
another heaven, and people all appear before God, the One, the
Overpowering–– 49 you [Prophet] will see the guilty on that Day,
bound together in fetters, 50 in garments of pitch, faces covered in
ﬁre. 51 [All will be judged] so that God may reward each soul as it
deserves: God is swift in His reckoning.
52 This is a message to all people, so that they may be warned by it,
and know that He is the only God, and so that those who have minds
may take heed.
a

This is an instance where dhalimun means ‘disbelievers’, see verse 44 and 31: 11, 13.

15. AL-HIJR
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the reference to the people of al-Hijr
(verses 80–4). These are an example of the many who disbelieved and
rejected their prophets. Each has its own time for punishment so the Prophet
should bear patiently, not grieve over what the disbelievers say, and continue
with his worship. The sura uses the example of nature and Iblis’s insistence
on corrupting people to show, in turn, God’s grace and the danger Satan
personiﬁes.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the Scripture, a Qur an that makes things
clear. 2 The disbelievers may well come to wish they had submitted
to God, 3 so [Prophet] leave them to eat and enjoy themselves. Let
[false] hopes distract them: they will come to know. 4 Never have We
destroyed a community that did not have a set time; 5 no community
can bring its time forward, nor delay it. 6 They say, ‘Receiver of this
Qur an! You are deﬁnitely mad. 7 Why do you not bring us the
angels, if you are telling the truth?’ 8 But We send down the angels
only to bring justice and then these people will not be reprieved. 9 We
have sent down the Qur an Ourself, and We Ourself will guard it.
Even before you [Prophet], 10 We sent messengers among the various
communities of old, 11 but they mocked every single messenger that
came to them: 12 in this way We make the message slip through the
hearts of evildoers. 13 They will not believe in it. That was what
happened with the peoples of long ago, 14 and even if We opened a
gateway into Heaven for them and they rose through it, higher and
higher, 15 they would still say, ‘Our eyes are hallucinating. We are
bewitched.’
16 We have set constellations up in the sky and made it beautiful for
all to see, 17 and guarded it from every stoned satan: a 18 any eavesdropper will be pursued by a clearly visible ﬂame. 19 As for the earth,
We have spread it out, set ﬁrm mountains on it, and made everything
a

See 72: 8–9.

15: 55

Al-Hijr

163

grow there in due balance. 20 We have provided sustenance in it for
you and for all those creatures for whom you do not provide. 21 There
is not a thing whose storehouses are not with Us. We send it down
only according to a well-deﬁned measure: 22 We send the winds to
fertilize, and We bring down water from the sky for you to drink––
you do not control its sources. 23 It is We who give life and death; it is
We who inherit [everything]. 24 We know exactly those of you who
come ﬁrst and those who come later. 25 [Prophet], it is your Lord who
will gather them all together: He is all wise, all knowing.
26 We created man out of dried clay formed from dark mud–– 27 the
jinn We created before, from the ﬁre of scorching wind. 28 Your Lord
said to the angels, ‘I will create a mortal out of dried clay, formed
from dark mud. 29 When I have fashioned him and breathed My
spirit into him, bow down before him,’ 30 and the angels all did so.
31 But not Iblis: he refused to bow down like the others. 32 God said,
‘Iblis, why did you not bow down like the others?’ 33 and he
answered, ‘I will not bow to a mortal You created from dried clay,
formed from dark mud.’ 34 ‘Get out of here!’ said God. ‘You are an
outcast, 35 rejected until the Day of Judgement.’ 36 Iblis said, ‘My
Lord, give me respite until the Day when they are raised from the
dead.’ 37 ‘You have respite,’ said God, 38 ‘until the Day of the
Appointed Time.’ 39 Iblis then said to God, ‘Because You have put
me in the wrong, I will lure mankind on earth and put them in the
wrong, 40 all except Your devoted servants.’ 41 God said, ‘[Devotion]
is a straight path to Me: 42 you will have no power over My servants,
only over the ones who go astray and follow you. 43 Hell is the
promised place for all these, 44 with seven gates, each gate having its
allotted share of them. 45 But the righteous will be in Gardens with
springs–– 46 “Enter them in peace and safety!”––47 and We shall
remove any bitterness from their hearts: [they will be like] brothers,
sitting on couches, face to face. 48 No weariness will ever touch them
there, nor will they ever be expelled.’ 49 [Prophet], tell My servants
that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful, 50 but My torment is the truly
painful one.
51 Tell them too about Abraham’s guests: 52 when they came to him
and said, ‘Peace,’ he said, ‘We are afraid of you.’ 53 ‘Do not be afraid,’
they said, ‘We bring you good news of a son who will have great
knowledge.’ 54 He said, ‘How can you give me such news when old
age has come to me? What sort of news is this?’ 55 They said, ‘We

164

The Qur an

15: 56

have told you the truth, so do not despair.’ 56 He said, ‘Who but the
misguided despair of the mercy of their Lord?’ 57 and then asked,
‘Messengers, what is your errand?’ 58 They replied, ‘We have been
sent to a people who are guilty.’ 59 But We shall save the household of
Lot, 60 all except his wife: We have decreed that she will be one of
those who stay behind.
61 When the messengers came to the household of Lot, 62 he said,
‘You are strangers.’ 63 They said, ‘We have brought you what they
said would never happen: 64 we have brought you the Truth. We
speak truly, 65 so leave in the dead of the night with your household,
and walk behind them. Let none of you look back. Go where you are
commanded.’ 66 We made this decree known to him: the last remnants
of those people would be wiped out in the morning. 67 The people of
the town came along, revelling, 68 and he told them, ‘These are my
guests, do not disgrace me. 69 Fear God, and do not shame me.’
70 They answered, ‘Have we not told you not to interfere [between us
and] anyone else?’ 71 He said, ‘My daughters are here, if you must.’
72 By your life [Prophet], they wandered on in their wild intoxication
73 and the blast overtook them at sunrise: 74 We turned their city
upside down and rained on them a shower of clay stones. 75 There
truly is a sign in this for those who can learn–– 76 it is still there on the
highway–– 77 there truly is a sign in this for those who believe.
78 The forest-dwellers, a too, were wrongdoers 79 and We took retribution on them; both are still there on the highway, plain for all to
see. 80 The people of al-Hijr b also rejected Our messengers: 81 We
gave them Our signs, but they turned their backs. 82 They carved out
dwellings in the mountains, and lived in security–– 83 the blast overwhelmed them early in the morning. 84 What they had gained was of
no use to them.
85 We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything
between them without a true purpose: the Hour will certainly come,
so [Prophet] bear with them graciously. 86 Your Lord is the All
Knowing Creator. 87 We have given you the seven oft-recited verses c
and the whole glorious Qur an. 88 Do not look longingly at the
good things We have given some to enjoy. Do not grieve over the
Cf. 26: 176–191; 38: 13; 50: 14.
The tribe of Thamud who lived north of Medina. Al-Hijr means ‘stone city’, like
Petra in Jordan.
c According to most interpreters this refers to al-Fatiha ‘The Opening’ (Sura 1).
a
b

15: 99

Al-Hijr

165

[disbelievers], but lower your wings over the believers 89 and say, ‘I
am here to give plain warning,’ 90 like the [warning] We have sent
down for those who divide themselves into bands a 91 and abuse the
Qur an b ––92 by your Lord, We will question them all 93 about their
deeds. 94 So proclaim openly what you have been commanded [to
say], and ignore the idolaters. 95 We are enough for you against all those
who ridicule your message, 96 who set up another god beside God––
they will come to know. 97 We are well aware that your heart is
weighed down by what they say. 98 Celebrate the glory of your Lord
and be among those who bow down to Him: 99 worship your
Lord until what is certain comes to you.
a This refers to some disbelievers who organized themselves into groups to meet
pilgrims and warn them against the Qur an.
b There are two interpretations of the word  idina given by Razi. One is ‘parts/
shreds’, the other is ‘lies/inventions’: ‘abuse’ covers both.

16. THE BEE
A Meccan sura. It takes its title from the bee (verses 68–9) inspired in its
remarkable way by God. This is just one of the numerous examples given in this
sura of God’s grace and the many things man should be grateful for. The sura
condemns the idolaters who attribute God’s bounty to other powers and worship
false deities. Abraham is given at the end as an example for the Muslim
community to follow. Until verse 88, the sura is directed at the polytheists; from
verse 90 onwards it teaches the Muslims in various ways. Verse 89 connects the
two parts by naming the Prophet as witness to the believers and disbelievers of
his community.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 God’s Judgement is coming, a so do not ask to bring it on sooner.
Glory be to Him! He is far above anything they join with Him! 2 He
sends down angels with inspiration at His command, to whichever of
His servants He chooses, to give [His] warning: ‘There is no god but
Me, so beware of Me.’ 3 He created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose, and He is far above whatever they join with Him! 4 He
created man from a drop of ﬂuid, and yet man openly challenges
Him. 5 And livestock––He created them too. You derive warmth
and other beneﬁts from them: you get food from them; 6 you ﬁnd
beauty in them when you bring them home to rest and when you
drive them out to pasture. 7 They carry your loads to lands you
yourselves could not reach without great hardship––truly your Lord
is kind and merciful––8 horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride
and use for show, and other things you know nothing about. 9 God
points out the right path, for some paths lead the wrong way: if He
wished, He could guide you all.
10 It is He who sends down water for you from the sky, from which
comes a drink for you, and the shrubs that you feed to your animals.
11 With it He grows for you grain, olives, palms, vines, and all kinds
of other crops. There truly is a sign in this for those who reﬂect. 12 By
His command He has made the night and day, the sun, moon, and
stars all of beneﬁt to you. There truly are signs in this for those who
a

The Arabic verb ata is in the past tense to express inevitability and nearness.

16: 31

The Bee

167

use their reason. 13 He has made of beneﬁt to you the many-coloured
things He has multiplied on the earth. There truly are signs in this
for those who take it to heart. 14 It is He who made the sea of beneﬁt
to you: you eat fresh ﬁsh from it and bring out jewellery to wear; you
see the ships cutting through its waves so that you may go in search
of His bounty and give thanks. 15 He has made mountains stand ﬁrm
on the earth, to prevent it shaking under you, and rivers and paths so
that you may ﬁnd your way, 16 and landmarks and stars to guide
people. 17 Can He who creates be compared to one who cannot
create? Why do you not take heed?
18 If you tried to count God’s blessings, you could never take them
all in: He is truly most forgiving and most merciful. 19 He knows
what you conceal and what you reveal. 20 Those they invoke beside
God create nothing; they are themselves created. 21 They are dead,
not living. They do not know when they will be raised up. 22 Your
God is the One God. As for those who deny the life to come, their
hearts refuse to admit the truth and they are arrogant. 23 There is no
doubt that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal. He
does not love the arrogant.
24 When they are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ they say,
‘Ancient fables.’ 25 On the Day of Resurrection they will bear the full
weight of their own burden, as well as some of the burden of those
they misled with no true knowledge. How terrible their burden will
be! 26 Those who went before them also schemed, but God attacked
the very foundations of what they built. The roof fell down on them:
punishment came on them from unimagined directions. 27 In the
end, on the Day of Resurrection, He will shame them, saying,
‘Where are these “partners” of Mine on whose account you opposed
[Me]?’ Those given knowledge will say, ‘Shame and misery on the
disbelievers today!’ 28 Those whose lives the angels take while they
are wronging themselves will show submission: ‘We were doing no
evil.’ ‘Yes you were: God knows fully everything that you have done,
29 so enter the gates of Hell. There you will remain–– the home of the
arrogant is evil indeed.’
30 But when the righteous are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent
down?’ they will say, ‘All that is good.’ There is a reward in this
present world for those who do good, but their home in the Hereafter is far better: the home of the righteous is excellent. 31 They will
enter perpetual Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams. There they

168

The Qur an

16: 32

will have everything they wish. This is the way God rewards the
righteous, 32 those whose lives the angels take in a state of goodness.
They will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. Enter the Garden as a
reward for what you have done.’ 33 Are the disbelievers waiting for
the angels to come to them, or your Lord’s Judgement? Those who
went before them did the same. God did not wrong them; they
wronged themselves. 34 So the evil they had done hit them and they
were surrounded by the very thing they had mocked.
35 Those who worshipped others alongside God say, ‘If God had
willed, we would not have worshipped anything but Him, nor
would our fathers. We would not have declared anything forbidden
without His sanction.’ Those before them said the same. Are the
messengers obliged to do anything other than deliver [their message]
clearly? 36 We sent a messenger to every community, saying, ‘Worship
God and shun false gods.’ Among them were some God guided;
misguidance took hold of others. So travel through the earth and see
what was the fate of those who denied the truth. 37 Though you
[Prophet] may be eager to guide them, God does not guide those
who misguide [others], a nor will they have anyone to help them.
38 They have sworn by God with their strongest oaths that He will
not raise the dead to life. But He will–– it is His binding promise,
though most people do not realize it–– 39 in order to make clear for
them what they have diﬀered about and so that the disbelievers may
realize that what they said was false. 40 When We will something to
happen, all that We say is, ‘Be,’ and it is. 41 As for those who emigrated in God’s cause after being wronged, We shall give them a
good home in this world, but the reward of the Hereafter will be far
greater, if they only knew it. 42 They are the ones who are steadfast
and put their trust in their Lord.
43 [Prophet], all the messengers We sent before you were simply
men to whom We had given the Revelation: you [people] can ask
those who have knowledge if you do not know. 44 We sent them with
clear signs and scriptures. We have sent down the message to you too
[Prophet], so that you can explain to people what was sent for them,
so that they may reﬂect.
45 Are those who plan evil so sure that God will not make the earth
swallow them up, that punishment will not come on them from some
a

Cf. verse 25.

16: 61

The Bee

169

unimagined direction, 46 that it will not catch them suddenly in the
midst of their comings and goings–– for they cannot frustrate God––
47 or that it will not catch up with them gradually? Indeed your Lord
is kind and merciful. 48 Do the [disbelievers] not observe the things
that God has created, casting their shadows right and left, submitting themselves to God obediently? 49 It is to God that everything in
the heavens and earth submits, every beast that moves, even the
angels–– they are free from arrogance: 50 they fear their Lord above
them, and they do as they are commanded.
51 God said, ‘Do not take two gods’–– for He is the One God––‘ I
alone am the One that you should hold in awe.’ 52 Everything in
the heavens and earth belongs to Him: everlasting obedience is His
right. Will you heed anyone other than God? 53 Whatever good
things you possess come from God, and when hardship aﬄicts
you, it is to Him alone you cry out for help, 54 yet when He has
relieved you of your hardship–– lo and behold!–– some of you
attribute partners to your Lord. 55 Let them show ingratitude for
the favours We have shown them; ‘Enjoy your brief time–– soon
you will know.’
56 They set aside part of the sustenance We give them, for [idols]
about which they have no true knowledge. a By God! You will be
questioned about your false inventions. 57 They assign daughters
to God b ––may He be exalted!––and the [sons] they desire to themselves. 58 When one of them is given news of the birth of a baby girl,
his face darkens and he is ﬁlled with gloom. 59 In his shame he hides
himself away from his people because of the bad news he has been
given. Should he keep her and suﬀer contempt or bury her in the
dust? How ill they judge! 60 Those who do not believe in the Hereafter should have the contemptible image, and God should have the
highest one: c He is the Mighty, the Wise. 61 If God took people to
task for the evil they do, He would not leave one living creature on
earth, but He reprieves them until an appointed time: when their
time comes they cannot delay it for a moment nor can they bring it
The pagan Arabs gave part of their crops and livestock to their deities (6: 136).
Some of the pagan Arabs called angels the daughters of God. This is doubly
blasphemous because of the contempt in which daughters were held in a warrior
community, to the extent of female infanticide as described below.
c Their image of God is that He can only have daughters, though they themselves
have contempt for their daughters.
a
b

170

The Qur an

16: 62

forward. 62 They attribute to God what they themselves dislike while
their own tongues utter the lie that the best a belongs to them. Without doubt it is the Fire that belongs to them: they will be given
priority there! b
63 By God, c We have sent messengers before you [Muhammad] to
other communities, but Satan made their foul deeds seem alluring
to them. He is the patron of these present disbelievers d too, and
a painful punishment awaits them all. 64 We have sent down the
Scripture to you only to make clear to them what they diﬀer about,
and as guidance and mercy to those who believe.
65 It is God who sends water down from the sky and with it revives
the earth when it is dead. There truly is a sign in this for people who
listen. 66 In livestock, too, you have a lesson–– We give you a drink
from the contents of their bellies, between waste matter and blood,
pure milk, sweet to the drinker. 67 From the fruits of date palms and
grapes you take sweet juice e and wholesome provisions. There truly
is a sign in this for people who use their reason. 68 And your Lord
inspired the bee, saying, ‘Build yourselves houses in the mountains
and trees and what people construct. 69 Then feed on all kinds
of fruit and follow the ways made easy for you by your Lord.’
From their bellies comes a drink of diﬀerent colours in which
there is healing for people. There truly is a sign in this for those
who think.
70 It is God who has created you and in time will cause you to die.
Some of you will be reduced, in old age, to a most abject state, so
that, after having knowledge, they will know nothing at all: God is
truly all knowing and all powerful. 71 God has given some of you
more provision than others. Those who have been given more are
unwilling to pass their provision on to the slaves they possess so that
they become their equals. How can they refuse to acknowledge
God’s blessings? 72 And it is God who has given you spouses from
amongst yourselves and through them He has given you children
and grandchildren and provided you with good things. How can they

a

i.e. sons.
This meaning of farata is supported by Razi.
c The disbelievers used to swear by their idols, so here God swears by Himself.
d This refers to the disbelievers of Mecca.
e The Arabic word sakar means ‘wine’, ‘juice’, or ‘vinegar’ (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).
b

16: 86

The Bee

171

believe in falsehood and deny God’s blessings? a 73 Those they worship
beside God have no power to provide anything for them from the
heavens or the earth: they can do nothing. 74 So do not make up
images about God: God knows and you do not.
75 God presents this illustration: a slave controlled by his master,
with no power over anything, and another man We have supplied
with good provision, from which he gives alms privately and openly.
Can they be considered equal? All praise belongs to God, but most
of them do not recognize this. 76 God presents another illustration:
two men, one of them dumb, unable to do anything, a burden to his
carer–– whatever task he directs him to, he achieves nothing good––
can he be considered equal to one who commands justice and is on
the straight path? 77 All that is hidden from view in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. The coming of the Hour of Judgement is like
the blink of an eye, or even quicker: God has power over everything.
78 It is God who brought you out of your mothers’ wombs knowing
nothing, and gave you hearing and sight and minds, so that you
might be thankful. 79 Do they not see the birds made to ﬂy through
the air in the sky? Nothing holds them up except God. There truly
are signs in this for those who believe. 80 It is God who has given you
a place of rest in your homes and from the skins of animals made
you homes that you ﬁnd light [to handle] when you travel and when
you set up camp; furnishings and comfort for a while from their
wool, fur, and hair. 81 It is God who has given you shade from what
He has created, and places of shelter in the mountains; garments to
protect you from the heat, and garments to protect you in your wars.
In this way He perfects His blessings on you, so that you may devote
yourselves to Him. 82 But if they turn away [Prophet], your only duty
is to deliver the message clearly. 83 They know God’s blessings, but
refuse to recognize them: most of them are ungrateful.
84 The day will come when We raise up a witness from every
community, when the disbelievers will not be allowed to make
excuses or amends. 85 When the evildoers face punishment it will
not be lightened for them nor will they be given any respite. 86 When
the idolaters see the partners they joined with God they will say,
‘Our Lord, these are the partners we used to invoke beside You,’
a i.e. claim that the partners they ascribe to God are the ones to give them such
blessings.

172

The Qur an

16: 87

but the partners will retort, ‘You are liars,’ 87 and on that Day they
will oﬀer total submission to God: their false deities will desert
them. 88 Because of the corruption they spread, We shall add torment
upon torment for those who disbelieved and barred others from the
path of God.
89 The day will come when We raise up in each community a
witness against them, and We shall bring you [Prophet] as a witness
against these people, for We have sent the Scripture down to you
explaining everything, and as guidance and mercy and good news to
those who devote themselves to God.
90 God commands justice, doing good, and generosity towards
relatives and He forbids what is shameful, blameworthy, and oppressive. He teaches you, so that you may take heed. 91 Fulﬁl any pledge
you make in God’s name and do not break oaths after you have
sworn them, for you have made God your surety: God knows everything you do. 92 Do not use your oaths to deceive each other–– like a
woman who unravels the thread she has ﬁrmly spun–– just because
one party may be more numerous than another. God tests you with
this, and on the Day of the Resurrection He will make clear to you
those things you diﬀered about.
93 If God so willed, He would have made you all one people, but
He leaves to stray whoever He will and guides whoever He will. You
will be questioned about your deeds. 94 Do not use your oaths to
deceive each other lest any foot should slip after being ﬁrmly placed
and lest you should taste the penalty for having hindered others from
the path of God, and suﬀer terrible torment. 95 Do not sell for a small
price any pledge made in God’s name: what God has [to give] is
better for you, if you only knew. 96 What you have runs out but what
God has endures, and We shall certainly reward those who remain
steadfast according to the best of their actions. 97 To whoever, male or
female, does good deeds and has faith, We shall give a good life and
reward them according to the best of their actions.
98 [Prophet], when you recite the Qur an, seek God’s protection
from the outcast, Satan. 99 He has no power over those who believe
and trust in their Lord; 100 his power is only over those who ally
themselves with him and those who, because of him, join partners
with God. 101 When We substitute one revelation for another––
and God knows best what He reveals–– they say, ‘You are just making
it up,’ but most of them have no knowledge. 102 Say that the Holy

16: 117

The Bee

173

Spirit a has brought the Revelation with the Truth step by step from
your Lord, to strengthen the believers and as guidance and good
news to the devout. 103 We know very well that they say, ‘It is a man
who teaches him,’ but the language of the person they allude to is
foreign, while this revelation is in clear Arabic. 104 If people do not
believe in God’s revelation, God does not guide them, and a painful
punishment awaits them. 105 Falsehood is fabricated only by those
who do not believe in God’s revelation: they are the liars. 106 With the
exception of those who are forced to say they do not believe,
although their hearts remain ﬁrm in faith, those who reject God after
believing in Him and open their hearts to disbelief will have the
wrath of God upon them and a grievous punishment awaiting them.
107 This is because they love the life of this world more than the one
to come, and God does not guide those who reject Him. 108 These are
people whose hearts, hearing, and sight have been closed oﬀ by God:
they are heedless, 109 and there is no doubt that they will be the losers
in the Hereafter. 110 But your Lord will be most forgiving and most
merciful to those who leave their homes after persecution, then strive
and remain steadfast. 111 On the Day when every soul will come
pleading for itself, every soul will be paid in full for all its actions––
they will not be wronged. 112 God presents the example of a town that
was secure and at ease, with provisions coming to it abundantly from
all places. Then it became ungrateful for God’s blessings, so God
aﬄicted it with the garment of famine and fear, for what its people
had done. 113 A messenger who was one of them came to them, but
they called him a liar. So punishment overwhelmed them in the
midst of their evildoing.
114 So eat of the good and lawful things God has provided for you
and be thankful for His blessings, b if it is Him that you worship. 115 He
has forbidden you only these things: carrion, blood, pig’s meat, and
animals over which any name other than God’s has been invoked.
But if anyone is forced by hunger, not desiring it nor exceeding
their immediate need, God is forgiving and merciful. 116 Do not say
falsely, ‘This is lawful and that is forbidden,’ inventing a lie about
God: those who invent lies about God will not prosper–– 117 they
may have a little enjoyment, but painful punishment awaits them.
a
b

This refers to the Angel Gabriel.
Unlike the ungrateful people just mentioned.

174

The Qur an

16: 118

118 [Prophet], We forbade the Jews what We told you about. a We did
not wrong them; they wronged themselves. 119 But towards those
who do wrong out of ignorance, and afterwards repent and make
amends, your Lord is most forgiving and merciful.
120 Abraham was truly an example: devoutly obedient to God and
true in faith. He was not an idolater; 121 he was thankful for the
blessings of God who chose him and guided him to a straight path.
122 We gave him blessings in this world, and he is among the righteous in the Hereafter. 123 Then We revealed to you [Muhammad],
‘Follow the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith who was not an
idolater.’ 124 The Sabbath was made obligatory only for those who
diﬀered about it. On the Day of Resurrection your Lord will judge
between them as to their diﬀerences.
125 [Prophet], call [people] to the way of your Lord with wisdom
and good teaching. Argue with them in the most courteous way, for
your Lord knows best who has strayed from His way and who is
rightly guided. 126 If you [believers] have to respond to an attack,
make your response proportionate, but it is best to stand fast. 127 So
[Prophet] be steadfast: your steadfastness comes only from God. Do
not grieve over them; do not be distressed by their scheming, 128 for
God is with those who are mindful of Him and who do good.
a

In an earlier revelation (see 6: 146).

17. THE NIGHT JOURNEY
A Meccan sura framed by references to the Children of Israel at the beginning,
and to Pharaoh at the end. The bulk of the sura deals with the Qur an as
guidance and warning, Muhammad, and the nature of prophecy, especially the
fact that he is a human being and incapable himself of producing miracles. It
also warns of Iblis’s promise to tempt mankind and of the fate of the disbelievers, and it gives a series of commandments (verses 22–39). The Night
Journey, which gives the sura its title, is mentioned in verse 1 and again in verse
60. Towards the end of the Meccan period, God caused Muhammad, in the
space of a single night, to journey from Mecca to Jerusalem and from there to
heaven and back again.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Glory to Him who made His servant travel by night from the
sacred place of worship a to the furthest place of worship, b whose
surroundings We have blessed, to show him some of Our signs: He
alone is the All Hearing, the All Seeing. 2 We also gave Moses the
Scripture, and made it a guide for the Children of Israel. ‘Entrust
yourselves to no one but Me, 3 you descendants of those We carried
with Noah: he was truly a thankful servant.’
4 We declared to the Children of Israel in the Scripture, ‘Twice
you will spread corruption in the land and become highly arrogant.’
5 When the ﬁrst of these warnings was fulﬁlled, We sent against you
servants of Ours with great force, and they ravaged your homes.
That warning was fulﬁlled, 6 but then We allowed you to prevail
against your enemy. We increased your wealth and oﬀspring and
made you more numerous––7 whether you do good or evil it is to
your own souls––and when the second warning was fulﬁlled [We
sent them] to shame your faces and enter the place of worship as they
did the ﬁrst time, and utterly destroy whatever fell into their power.
8 Your Lord may yet have mercy on you, but if you do the same
again, so shall We: We have made Hell a prison for those who defy
[Our warning].
a

In Mecca.

b

In Jerusalem.

176

The Qur an

17: 9

9 This Qur an does indeed show the straightest way. It gives the
faithful who do right the good news that they will have a great
reward and 10 warns that We have prepared an agonizing punishment for those who do not believe in the world to come. 11 Yet man
prays for harm, just as he prays for good: man is ever hasty. 12 We
made the night and the day as two signs, then darkened the night
and made the daylight for seeing, for you to seek your Lord’s bounty
and to know how to count the years and calculate. We have
explained everything in detail. 13 We have bound each human
being’s destiny to his neck. On the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out a record for each of them, which they will ﬁnd spread
wide open, 14 ‘Read your record. Today your own soul is enough to
calculate your account.’
15 Whoever accepts guidance does so for his own good; whoever
strays does so at his own peril. No soul will bear another’s burden,
nor do We punish until We have sent a messenger. 16 When We
decide to destroy a town, We command those corrupted by wealth
[to reform], but they [persist in their] disobedience; Our sentence is
passed, and We destroy them utterly. 17 How many generations We
have destroyed since Noah! Your Lord knows and observes the sins
of His servants well enough. 18 If anyone desires [only] the ﬂeeting
life, We speed up whatever We will in it, for whoever We wish; in the
end We have prepared Hell for him in which to burn, disgraced and
rejected. 19 But if anyone desires the life to come and strives after it as
he should, as a true believer, his striving will be thanked. 20 To both
the latter and the former, We give some of your Lord’s bounty.
[Prophet], your Lord’s bounty is not restricted–– 21 see how We have
given some more than others–– but the Hereafter holds greater ranks
and greater favours.
22 Set up a no other god beside God, or you will end up disgraced
and forsaken. 23 Your Lord has commanded that you should worship
none but Him, and that you be kind to your parents. If either or both
of them reach old age with you, say no word that shows impatience
with them, and do not be harsh with them, but speak to them
respectfully 24 and lower your wing in humility towards them in
kindness and say, ‘Lord, have mercy on them, just as they cared for
me when I was little.’ 25 Your Lord knows best what is in your heart.
a

This verb is addressed to mankind as a whole (Razi).

17: 44

177

The Night Journey

If you are good, He is most forgiving to those who return to Him.
26 Give relatives their due, and the needy, and travellers–– do not
squander your wealth wastefully: 27 those who squander are the
brothers of Satan, and Satan is most ungrateful to his Lord–– 28 but
if, while seeking some bounty that you expect from your Lord, you
turn them down, then at least speak some word of comfort to them.
29 Do not be tight-ﬁsted, nor so open-handed that you end up blamed
and overwhelmed with regret. 30 Your Lord gives abundantly to whoever He will, and sparingly to whoever He will: He knows and
observes His servants thoroughly.
31 Do not kill your children for fear of poverty a ––We shall provide
for them and for you––killing them is a great sin. 32 And do not go
anywhere near adultery: it is an outrage, and an evil path. 33 Do not
take life, which God has made sacred, except by right: if anyone is
killed wrongfully, We have given authority to the defender of his
rights, but he should not be excessive in taking life, for he is already
aided [by God]. 34 Do not go near the orphan’s property, b except
with the best [intentions], until he reaches the age of maturity.
Honour your pledges: you will be questioned about your pledges.
35 Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with accurate
scales: that is better and fairer in the end. 36 Do not follow blindly
what you do not know to be true: ears, eyes, and heart, you will be
questioned about all these. 37 Do not strut arrogantly about the earth:
you cannot break it open, nor match the mountains in height. 38 The
evil of all these actions is hateful to your Lord.
39 [Prophet], this is some of the wisdom your Lord has revealed to
you: do not set up another god beside God, or you will be thrown
into Hell, blamed and rejected. 40 What? Has your Lord favoured you
people with sons and taken daughters for Himself from the angels? c
What a monstrous thing for you to say!
41 We have explained things in various ways in this Qur an, so that
such people might take notice, but it has only turned them further
away. 42 Say, ‘If there were other gods along with Him, as they say
there are, then they would have tried to ﬁnd a way to the Lord of
the Throne.’ 43 Glory to Him! He is far above what they say! 44 The
seven heavens and the earth and everyone in them glorify Him.
There is not a single thing that does not celebrate His praise, though
a

See 81: 8–9.

b

Cf. 4: 2.

c

See also 16: 57–62.

178

The Qur an

17: 45

you do not understand their praise: He is most forbearing, most
forgiving.
45 [Prophet], when you recite the Qur an, We put an invisible
barrier between you and those who do not believe in the life to come.
46 We have put covers on their hearts that prevent them from understanding it, and heaviness in their ears. When you mention your
Lord in the Qur an, and Him alone, they turn their backs and run
away. 47 We know best the way they listen, when they listen to you
and when they confer in secret, and these wrongdoers say, ‘You are
only following a man who is bewitched.’ 48 See what they think you
are like! But they are lost and cannot ﬁnd the right way. 49 They also
say, ‘What? When we are turned to bones and dust, shall we really be
raised up in a new act of creation?’ 50 Say, ‘[Yes] even if you were [as
hard as] stone, or iron, 51 or any other substance you think hard to
bring to life.’ Then they will say, ‘Who will bring us back?’ Say, ‘The
One who created you the ﬁrst time.’ Then they will shake their heads
at you and say, ‘When will that be?’ Say, ‘It may well be very soon:
52 it will be the Day when He calls you, and you answer by praising
Him, and you think you have stayed [on earth] only a little while.’
53 [Prophet], tell My servants to say what is best. a Satan sows
discord among them: Satan is a sworn enemy of man. 54 Your Lord
has the most knowledge about all of you: if He pleases He will have
mercy on you, and if He pleases He will punish you. [Prophet], We
did not send you to take charge of them. 55 Your Lord knows best
about everyone in the heavens and the earth. We gave some prophets
more than others: We gave David a book [of Psalms]. b 56 Say, ‘Call
upon those you claim to be deities beside God: they have no power to
remove or avert any harm from you.’ 57 Those [angels] c they pray to
are themselves seeking a way to their Lord, even those who are
closest to Him. They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment.
The punishment of your Lord is much to be feared: 58 there is no
community d We shall not destroy, or punish severely, before the Day
of Resurrection–– this is written in the Book. e
59 Nothing prevents Us from sending miraculous signs, f except
In arguing about religion and proving it as God has shown here. See 16: 125; 29: 46.
c See verse 40.
See also 4: 163–6.
d Of evildoers. See 18: 16; 7: 101.
e God’s divine Record.
f See 2: 118 for signs demanded by those without knowledge.
a
b

17: 71

The Night Journey

179

the fact that previous peoples denied them. We gave the people of
Thamud the she-camel as a clear sign, yet they maltreated it. We
send signs only to give warning. 60 [Prophet], We have told you that
your Lord knows all about human beings. The vision We showed
you a was only a test for people, as was the cursed tree [mentioned] in
the Qur an. b We warn them, but this only increases their insolence.
61 When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all
bowed down, but not Iblis. He retorted, ‘Why should I bow down to
someone You have created out of clay?’ 62 and [then] said, ‘You see
this being You have honoured above me? If You reprieve me until the
Day of Resurrection, I will lead all but a few of his descendants by
the nose.’ 63 God said, ‘Go away! Hell will be your reward, and the
reward of any of them who follow you–– an ample reward. 64 Rouse
whichever of them you can with your voice, muster your cavalry and
infantry against them, share their wealth and their children with
them, and make promises to them–– Satan promises them nothing
but delusion–– 65 but you will have no authority over My [true]
servants: Your Lord can take care of them well enough.’
66 [People], it is your Lord who makes ships go smoothly for you
on the sea so that you can seek His bounty: He is most merciful
towards you. 67 When you get into distress at sea, those you pray to
besides Him desert you, but when He brings you back safe to land
you turn away: man is ever ungrateful. 68 Can you be sure that God
will not have you swallowed up into the earth when you are back on
land, or that He will not send a sandstorm against you? Then you
will ﬁnd no one to protect you. 69 Or can you be sure that He will
not send you back out to sea, and send a violent storm against you
to drown you for being so ungrateful? You will ﬁnd no helper
against Us there. 70 We have honoured the children of Adam and
carried them by land and sea; We have provided good sustenance
for them and favoured them specially above many of those We have
created.
71 On the Day when We summon each community, along with its
leader, c those who are given their record in their right hand will read
a

The vision he was shown on the Night Journey.
Said to refer to the tree of Zaqqum in Hell (see 56: 52; 44: 43–6). The eater will curse
its fruits (Razi). Both the vision and the tree in Hell were objects of derision for the
disbelievers.
c See 16: 89.
b

180

The Qur an

17: 72

it [with pleasure]. a But no one will be wronged in the least: 72 those
who were blind in this life will be blind in the Hereafter, and even
further oﬀ the path. 73 [Prophet], the disbelievers tried to tempt you
away from what We revealed to you, so that you would invent some
other revelation and attribute it to Us and then they would have
taken you as a friend. 74 If We had not made you stand ﬁrm, you
would almost have inclined a little towards them. 75 In that case, We
would have made you taste a double punishment in this life, and a
double punishment after death and then you would have found no
one to help you against Us. 76 They planned to scare you oﬀ the land,
but they would not have lasted for more than a little while after you.
77 Such was Our way with the messengers We sent before you, and
you will ﬁnd no change in Our ways.
78 So perform the regular prayers in the period from the time the
sun is past its zenith till the darkness of the night, and [recite] the
Qur an at dawn–– dawn recitation is always witnessed b ––79 and during the night wake up and pray, as an extra oﬀering of your own, so
that your Lord may raise you to a [highly] praised status. 80 Say,
‘My Lord, make me go in truthfully, and come out truthfully, and
grant me supporting authority from You.’ 81 And say, ‘The truth
has come, and falsehood has passed away: falsehood is bound to
pass away.’
82 We send down the Qur an as healing and mercy to those who
believe; as for those who disbelieve, it only increases their loss.
83 When We favour man he turns arrogantly to one side, but when
harm touches him, he falls into despair. 84 Say, ‘Everyone does
things their own way, but your Lord is fully aware of who follows the
best-guided path.’
85 [Prophet], they ask you about the Spirit. Say, ‘The Spirit is part
of my Lord’s domain. You have only been given a little knowledge.’
86 If We pleased, We could take away what We have revealed to you––
then you would ﬁnd no one to plead for you against Us–– 87 if it were
not for your Lord’s mercy: His favour to you has been truly great.
88 Say, ‘Even if all mankind and jinn came together to produce
something like this Qur an, they could not produce anything like it,
however much they helped each other.’ 89 In this Qur an, We have set
a
b

Cf. 69: 19–24.
By the angels. See Bukhari, Sahih, ‘Mawaqit’, 16.

17: 105

The Night Journey

181

out all kinds of examples for people, yet most of them persist in
disbelieving. 90 They say, ‘We will not believe for you [Muhammad]
until you make a spring gush out of the ground for us; 91 or until you
have a garden of date palms and vines, and make rivers pour through
them; 92 or make the sky fall on us in pieces, as you claimed will
happen; or bring God and the angels before us face to face; 93 or have
a house made of gold; or ascend into the sky–– even then, we will not
believe in your ascension until you send a real book down for us
to read.’ Say, ‘Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything but a mortal, a
messenger?’ 94 The only thing that kept these people from believing,
when guidance came to them, was that they said, ‘How could God
have sent a human being as a messenger?’ 95 Say, ‘If there were angels
walking about on earth, feeling at home, We would have sent them an
angel from Heaven as a messenger.’ 96 Say, ‘God is witness enough
between me and you. He knows and observes His servants well.’
97 [Prophet], anyone God guides is truly guided, and you will ﬁnd
no protector other than Him for anyone He leaves astray. On the Day
of Resurrection We shall gather them, lying on their faces, blind,
dumb, and deaf. Hell will be their Home. Whenever the Fire goes
down, We shall make it blaze more ﬁercely for them. 98 This is what
they will get for rejecting Our signs and saying, ‘What? When we are
turned to bones and dust, how can we be raised in a new act of
creation?’ 99 Do they not see that God, who created the heavens and
earth, can create the likes of them [anew]? He has ordained a time for
them–– there is no doubt about that–– but the evildoers refuse everything except disbelief. 100 Say, ‘If you possessed the very stores of my
Lord’s bounty, you would hold them back in your fear of spending:
man is ever grudging.’
101 In the past, We gave Moses nine clear signs–– ask the Children
of Israel. When Moses came to [the Egyptians], Pharaoh said to him,
‘Moses, I think you are bewitched.’ 102 He said, ‘You know very well
that only the Lord of the heavens and earth could have sent these
signs as clear proof. I think that you, Pharaoh, are doomed.’ 103 So he
wanted to wipe them oﬀ the [face of the] earth, but We drowned him
and those with him. 104 After his death, We told the Children of
Israel, ‘Live in the land, and when the promise of the Hereafter is
fulﬁlled, We shall bring you to the assembly of all people.’
105 We sent down the Qur an with the truth, and with the truth it
has come down–– [Prophet], We sent you only to give good news and

182

The Qur an

17: 106

warning–– 106 it is a recitation that We have revealed in parts, so that
you can recite it to people at intervals; We have sent it down little by
little. 107 Say, ‘Whether you believe it or not, those who were given
knowledge earlier fall down on their faces when it is recited to them,
108 and say, “Glory to our Lord! Our Lord’s promise has been fulﬁlled.” 109 They fall down on their faces, weeping, and [the Qur an]
increases their humility.’ 110 Say [to them], ‘Call on God, or on the
Lord of Mercy–– whatever names you call Him, the best names
belong to Him.’ [Prophet], do not be too loud in your prayer, or too
quiet, but seek a middle way 111 and say, ‘Praise belongs to God, who
has no child nor partner in His rule. He is not so weak as to need a
protector. Proclaim His limitless greatness!’

18. THE CAVE
A Meccan sura which gets its name from the Sleepers of the Cave, whose story
takes a prominent place in the sura (verses 9–26). This sura also deals with two
other stories: Moses’ meeting with an unidentiﬁed ﬁgure (verses 60–82), and
the story of Dhu ’l-Qarnayn (verses 83–99). A parable is put forward for the
people of Mecca: the parable of the luscious gardens belonging to an arrogant
and ungrateful man, which God reduces to dust. The sura opens and closes with
references to the Qur an itself.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Praise be to God, who sent down the Scripture to His servant and
made it unerringly straight, 2 warning of severe punishment from
Him, and [giving] glad news to the believers who do good deeds––an
excellent reward 3 that they will always enjoy. 4 It warns those people
who assert, ‘God has oﬀspring.’ a 5 They have no knowledge about
this, nor did their forefathers––it is a monstrous assertion that comes
out of their mouths: what they say is nothing but lies. 6 But [Prophet]
are you going to worry yourself to death over them if they do not
believe in this message?
7 We have adorned the earth with attractive things so that We may
test people to ﬁnd out which of them do best, 8 but We shall reduce
all this to barren dust. 9 [Prophet], do you ﬁnd the Companions in the
Cave and al-Raqim b so wondrous, among all Our other signs?
10 When the young men sought refuge in the cave and said, ‘Our
Lord, grant us Your mercy, and ﬁnd us a good way out of our ordeal,’
11 We sealed their ears [with sleep] in the cave for years. 12 Then We
woke them so that We could make clear which of the two parties c was
better able to work out how long they had been there.
13 [Prophet], We shall tell you their story as it really was. They
were young men who believed in their Lord, and We gave them more
a Walad in classical Arabic applies to masculine and feminine, singular and plural. As
this sura is Meccan, it most probably refers to Meccan claims that the angels are
daughters of God.
b Al-Raqim is variously interpreted as being the name of the mountain in which the
cave was situated, the name of their dog, or an inscription bearing their names.
c See verse 19.

184

The Qur an

18: 14

and more guidance. 14 We gave strength to their hearts when they
stood up and said, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and earth.
We shall never call upon any god other than Him, for that would be
an outrageous thing to do. 15 These people of ours have taken gods
other than Him. Why do they not produce clear evidence about
them? Who could be more unjust than someone who makes up lies
about God? 16 Now that you have left such people, and what they
worshipped instead of God, take refuge in the cave. God will shower
His mercy on you and make you an easy way out of your ordeal.’
17 You could have seen the [light of the] sun as it rose, moving away
to the right of their cave, and when it set, moving away to the left of
them, while they lay in the wide space inside the cave. (This is one
of God’s signs: those people God guides are rightly guided, but you
will ﬁnd no protector to lead to the right path those He leaves to
stray.) 18 You would have thought they were awake, though they lay
asleep. We turned them over, to the right and the left, with their dog
stretching out its forelegs at the entrance. If you had seen them, you
would have turned and run away, ﬁlled with fear of them.
19 In time We woke them, and they began to question one another.
One of them asked, ‘How long have you been here?’ and [some]
answered, ‘A day or part of a day,’ but then [others] said, ‘Your Lord
knows best how long you have been here. One of you go to the
city with your silver coins, ﬁnd out where the best food is there,
and bring some back. But be careful not to let anyone know about
you: 20 if they found you out, they would stone you or force you to
return to their religion, where you would never come to any good.’
21 In this way We brought them to people’s attention so that they
might know that God’s promise [of resurrection] is true and that
there is no doubt about the Last Hour, [though] people argue among
themselves.
[Some] said, ‘Construct a building over them: their Lord knows
best about them.’ Those who prevailed said, ‘We shall build a place
of worship over them.’ 22 [Some] say, ‘The sleepers were three, and
their dog made four,’ others say, ‘They were ﬁve, and the dog made
six’–– guessing in the dark–– and some say, ‘They were seven, and
their dog made eight.’ Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord knows best how
many they were.’ Only a few have real knowledge about them,
so do not argue, but stick to what is clear, and do not ask any of
these people about them; 23 do not say of anything, ‘I will do that

18: 35

The Cave

185

tomorrow,’ a 24 without adding, ‘God willing,’ and, whenever you
forget, remember your Lord and say, ‘May my Lord guide me closer
to what is right.’ 25 [Some say], ‘The sleepers stayed in their cave
for three hundred years,’ some added nine more. 26 Say [Prophet],
‘God knows best how long they stayed.’ His is the knowledge of all
that is hidden in the heavens and earth–– How well He sees! How
well He hears!–– and they have no one to protect them other than
Him; He does not allow anyone to share His rule.
27 [Prophet], follow what has been revealed to you of your Lord’s
Scripture: there is no changing His words, nor can you ﬁnd any
refuge except with Him. 28 Content yourself with those who pray to
their Lord morning and evening, seeking His approval, and do not
let your eyes turn away from them out of desire for the attractions of
this worldly life: b do not yield to those whose hearts We have made
heedless of Our Qur an, those who follow their own low desires,
those whose ways are unbridled. 29 Say, ‘Now the truth has come
from your Lord: let those who wish to believe in it do so, and let
those who wish to reject it do so.’ We have prepared a Fire for the
wrongdoers that will envelop them from all sides. If they call for
relief, they will be relieved with water like molten metal, scalding
their faces. What a terrible drink! What a painful resting place! 30 As
for those who believe and do good deeds–– We do not let the reward
of anyone who does a good deed go to waste–– 31 they will have
Gardens of lasting bliss graced with ﬂowing streams. There they will
be adorned with bracelets of gold. There they will wear green garments of ﬁne silk and brocade. There they will be comfortably seated
on soft chairs. What a blessed reward! What a pleasant resting place!
32 Tell them the parable of two men: for one of them We made two
gardens of grape vines, surrounded them with date palms, and put
corn ﬁelds in between; 33 both gardens yielded fruit and did not fail
in any way; We made a stream ﬂow through them, 34 and so he had
abundant fruit. One day, while talking to his friend, he said, ‘I have
more wealth and a larger following than you.’ 35 He went into his
garden and wronged himself by saying, ‘I do not think this will ever
a When the Prophet was challenged by the Meccans, prompted by the Jews, to
explain the story of the Sleepers, he promised to do it ‘tomorrow’, but did not receive
revelation about it for some days afterwards.
b The notables of Mecca tried to persuade the Prophet to attend to them and drive
away his humble followers. See 17: 73–4, 80: 1–10.

186

The Qur an

18: 36

perish, 36 or that the Last Hour will ever come–– even if I were to be
taken back to my Lord, I would certainly ﬁnd something even better
there.’ 37 His companion retorted, ‘Have you no faith in Him who
created you from dust, from a small drop of ﬂuid, then shaped you
into a man? 38 But, for me, He is God, my Lord, and I will never set
up any partner with Him. 39 If only, when you entered your garden,
you had said, “This is God’s will. There is no power not [given] by
God.” Although you see I have less wealth and oﬀspring than you,
40 my Lord may well give me something better than your garden, and
send thunderbolts on your garden from the sky, so that it becomes a
heap of barren dust; 41 or its water may sink so deep into the ground
that you will never be able to reach it again.’ 42 And so it was: his fruit
was completely destroyed, and there he was, wringing his hands over
what he had invested in it, as it drooped on its trellises, and saying, ‘I
wish I had not set up any partner to my Lord.’ 43 He had no forces to
help him other than God–– he could not even help himself. 44 In that
situation, the only protection is that of God, the True God: He gives
the best rewards and the best outcome.
45 Tell them, too, what the life of this world is like: We send water
down from the skies and the earth’s vegetation absorbs it, but soon
the plants turn to dry stubble scattered about by the wind: God has
power over everything. 46 Wealth and children are the attractions of
this worldly life, but lasting good works have a better reward with
your Lord and give better grounds for hope. 47 One day We shall make
the mountains move, and you will see the earth as an open plain. We
shall gather all people together, leaving no one. 48 They will be lined
up before your Lord: ‘Now you have come to Us as We ﬁrst created
you, although you claimed We had not made any such appointment
for you.’ 49 The record of their deeds will be laid open and you will
see the guilty, dismayed at what they contain, saying, ‘Woe to us!
What a record this is! It does not leave any deed, small or large,
unaccounted for!’ They will ﬁnd everything they ever did laid in
front of them: your Lord will not be unjust to anyone.
50 We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ and they all
bowed down, but not Iblis: he was one of the jinn and he disobeyed
his Lord’s command. Are you [people] going to take him and his
oﬀspring as your masters instead of Me, even though they are your
enemies? What a bad bargain for the evildoers! 51 I did not make
them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and earth, nor to their

18: 67

The Cave

187

own creation; I do not take as My supporters those who lead others
astray. 52 On the Day God will say, ‘Call on those you claimed were
My partners,’ they will call them but they will not answer; We shall
set a deadly gulf between them. 53 The evildoers will see the Fire and
they will realize that they are about to fall into it: they will ﬁnd no
escape from it.
54 In this Qur an We have presented every kind of description for
people but man is more contentious than any other creature. 55 Now
that guidance has come to them, what stops these people believing
and asking forgiveness from their Lord before the fate of earlier
peoples annihilates them or their torment confronts them? 56 We only
send messengers to bring good news and to deliver warning, yet the
disbelievers seek to refute the truth with false arguments and make
fun of My messages and warnings. 57 Who could be more wrong than
the person who is reminded of his Lord’s messages and turns his
back on them, ignoring what his hands are storing up for him [in the
Hereafter]? We have put covers over their hearts, so they cannot
understand the Qur an, and We put heaviness in their ears: although
you call them to guidance [Prophet] they will never accept it. 58 Your
Lord is the Most Forgiving, and full of mercy: if He took them to
task for the wrongs they have done, He would hasten their punishment on. They have an appointed time from which they will have no
escape, 59 [just like] the former communities We destroyed for doing
wrong: We set an appointed time for their destruction.
60 Moses said to his servant, ‘I will not rest until I reach the place
where the two seas meet, even if it takes me years!’ 61 but when they
reached the place where the two seas meet, they had forgotten all
about their ﬁsh, which made its way into the sea and swam away.
62 They journeyed on, and then Moses said to his servant, ‘Give us
our lunch! This journey of ours is very tiring,’ 63 and [the servant]
said, ‘Remember when we were resting by the rock? I forgot the
ﬁsh–– Satan made me forget to pay attention to it–– and it [must
have] made its way into the sea.’ ‘How strange!’ 64 Moses said, ‘Then
that was the place we were looking for.’ So the two turned back,
retraced their footsteps, 65 and found one of Our servants–– a man
to whom We had granted Our mercy and whom We had given
knowledge of Our own. 66 Moses said to him, ‘May I follow you so
that you can teach me some of the right guidance you have been
taught?’ 67 The man said, ‘You will not be able to bear with me

188

The Qur an

18: 68

patiently. 68 How could you be patient in matters beyond your knowledge?’ 69 Moses said, ‘God willing, you will ﬁnd me patient. I will
not disobey you in any way.’ 70 The man said, ‘If you follow me then,
do not query anything I do before I mention it to you myself.’
71 They travelled on. Later, when they got into a boat, and the man
made a hole in it, Moses said, ‘How could you make a hole in it? Do
you want to drown its passengers? What a strange thing to do!’ 72 He
replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear with
me patiently?’ 73 Moses said, ‘Forgive me for forgetting. Do not make
it too hard for me to follow you.’ 74 And so they travelled on. Then,
when they met a young boy and the man killed him, Moses said,
‘How could you kill an innocent person? He has not killed anyone!
What a terrible thing to do!’ 75 He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you
would never be able to bear with me patiently?’ 76 Moses said, ‘From
now on, if I query anything you do, banish me from your company––
you have put up with enough from me.’ 77 And so they travelled on.
Then, when they came to a town and asked the inhabitants for food
but were refused hospitality, they saw a wall there that was on the
point of falling down and the man repaired it. Moses said, ‘But if
you had wished you could have taken payment for doing that.’ 78 He
said, ‘This is where you and I part company. I will tell you the
meaning of the things you could not bear with patiently: 79 the boat
belonged to some needy people who made their living from the sea
and I damaged it because I knew that coming after them was a king
who was seizing every [serviceable] boat by force. 80 The young boy
had parents who were people of faith, and so, fearing he would
trouble them through wickedness and disbelief, 81 we wished that
their Lord should give them another child–– purer and more compassionate–– in his place. 82 The wall belonged to two young orphans
in the town and there was buried treasure beneath it belonging to
them. Their father had been a righteous man, so your Lord intended
them to reach maturity and then dig up their treasure as a mercy
from your Lord. I did not do [these things] of my own accord: these
are the explanations for those things you could not bear with
patience.’
83 [Prophet], they ask you about Dhu ’l-Qarnayn. a Say, ‘I will tell
you something about him.’ 84 We established his power in the land,
a

Literally ‘the two-horned one’, said by some to be Alexander the Great.

18: 105

The Cave

189

and gave him the means to achieve everything. 85 He travelled on a
certain road; 86 then, when he came to the setting of the sun, he
found it [seemed to be] setting into a muddy spring. Nearby he
found some people and We said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, you may choose
[which of them] to punish or show kindness to.’ 87 He answered, ‘We
shall punish those who have done evil, and when they are returned to
their Lord He will punish them [even more] severely, 88 while those
who believed and did good deeds will have the best of rewards: we
shall command them to do what is easy for them.’ 89 He travelled on;
90 then, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a
people for whom We had provided no shelter from it. 91 And so it
was: We knew all about him.
92 He travelled on; 93 then, when he reached a place between two
mountain barriers, he found beside them a people who could barely
understand him. 94 They said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog are
ruining this land. Will you build a barrier between them and us if we
pay you a tribute?’ 95 He answered, ‘The power my Lord has given
me is better than any tribute, but if you lend me your strength, I will
put up a fortiﬁcation between you and them: 96 bring me lumps of
iron!’ and then, when he had ﬁlled the gap between the two mountainsides [he said], ‘Work your bellows!’ and then, when he had made
it glow like ﬁre, he said, ‘Bring me molten metal to pour over it!’
97 Their enemies could not scale the barrier, nor could they pierce it,
98 and he said, ‘This is a mercy from my Lord. But when my Lord’s
promise is fulﬁlled, He will raze this barrier to the ground: my
Lord’s promise always comes true.’ 99 On that Day, We shall let them
surge against each other like waves and then the Trumpet will be
blown and We shall gather them all together. 100 We shall show Hell to
the disbelievers, 101 those whose eyes were blind to My signs, those
who were unable to hear. 102 Did they think that they could take My
servants as masters instead of Me? We have prepared Hell as the
disbelievers’ resting place.
103 Say [Prophet], ‘Shall we a tell you who has the most to lose by
their actions, 104 whose eﬀorts in this world are misguided, even
when they think they are doing good work? 105 It is those who disbelieve in their Lord’s messages and deny that they will meet Him.’
Their deeds come to nothing: on the Day of Resurrection We shall
a

This ‘we’ presumably refers to the Prophet and his community of believers.

190

The Qur an

18: 106

give them no weight. 106 Their recompense for having disbelieved and
made fun of My messages and My messengers will be Hell. 107 But
those who believe and do good deeds will be given the Gardens of
Paradise. 108 There they will remain, never wishing to leave.
109 Say [Prophet], ‘If the whole ocean a were ink for writing the
words of my Lord, it would run dry before those words were
exhausted’–– even if We were to add another ocean to it. 110 Say, ‘I am
only a human being, like you, to whom it has been revealed that your
God is One. Anyone who fears b to meet his Lord should do good
deeds and give no one a share in the worship due to his Lord.
a
b

The term bahr refers to all wide expanses of water.
See note to 10: 7.

19. MARY
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the story of Mary (verses 16–35). It
recounts the grace given by God to a number of prophets and tells aspects of
their stories. The claim that Jesus is the son of God is ﬁrmly denied, as is the
assertion of the pagans of Mecca that the angels are God’s daughters. From
verses 66 to 98 the sura discusses the arrogant assertions of the disbelievers
of Mecca. The Prophet is told that God’s punishment is coming to them and
exhorted not to be impatient for it to arrive or to receive the revelation (verses
64–5).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Kaf Ha Ya  Ayn Sad
2 This is an account of your Lord’s grace towards His servant,
Zachariah, 3 when he called to his Lord secretly, saying, 4 ‘Lord, my
bones have weakened and my hair is ashen grey, but never, Lord,
have I ever prayed to You in vain: 5 I fear [what] my kinsmen [will do]
when I am gone, for my wife is barren, so grant me a successor––a
gift from You––6 to be my heir and the heir of the family of Jacob.
Lord, make him well pleasing [to You].’ 7 ‘Zachariah, We bring you
good news of a son whose name will be John––We have chosen this
name for no one before him.’ 8 He said, ‘Lord, how can I have a son
when my wife is barren, and I am old and frail?’ 9 He said, ‘This is
what your Lord has said: “It is easy for Me: I created you, though
you were nothing before.” ’
10 He said, ‘Give me a sign, Lord.’ He said, ‘Your sign is that you
will not [be able to] speak to anyone for three full [days and] nights.’
11 He went out of the sanctuary to his people and signalled to them to
praise God morning and evening.
12 [We said], ‘John, hold on to the Scripture ﬁrmly.’ While he was
still a boy, We granted him wisdom, 13 tenderness from Us, and
purity. He was devout, 14 kind to his parents, not domineering or
rebellious. 15 Peace was on him the day he was born, the day he died,
and it will be on him the day he is raised to life again.
16 Mention in the Qur an the story of Mary. She withdrew from

192

The Qur an

19: 17

her family to a place to the east 17 and secluded herself away; We sent
Our Spirit to appear before her in the form of a perfected man. 18 She
said, ‘I seek the Lord of Mercy’s protection against you: if you have
any fear of Him [do not approach]!’ 19 but he said, ‘I am but a Messenger from your Lord, [come] to announce to you the gift of a pure
son.’ 20 She said, ‘How can I have a son when no man has touched
me? I have not been unchaste,’ 21 and he said, ‘This is what your Lord
said: “It is easy for Me–– We shall make him a sign to all people, a
blessing from Us.”’ 22 And so it was ordained: she conceived him.
She withdrew to a distant place 23 and, when the pains of childbirth
drove her to [cling to] the trunk of a palm tree, she exclaimed, ‘I wish
I had been dead and forgotten long before all this!’ 24 but a voice cried
to her from below, ‘Do not worry: your Lord has provided a stream
at your feet 25 and, if you shake the trunk of the palm tree towards
you, it will deliver fresh ripe dates for you, 26 so eat, drink, be glad,
and say to anyone you may see: “I have vowed to the Lord of Mercy
to abstain a from conversation, and I will not talk to anyone today.”’
27 She went back to her people carrying the child, and they said,
‘Mary! You have done something terrible! 28 Sister b of Aaron! Your
father was not an evil man; your mother was not unchaste!’ 29 She
pointed at him. They said, ‘How can we converse with an infant?’ c
30 [But] he said: ‘I am a servant of God. He has granted me the
Scripture; made me a prophet; 31 made me blessed wherever I may
be. He commanded me to pray, to give alms as long as I live, 32 to
cherish my mother. He did not make me domineering or graceless.
33 Peace was on me the day I was born, and will be on me the day I
die and the day I am raised to life again.’ 34 Such was Jesus, son
of Mary.
[This is] a statement of the Truth about which they are in doubt:
35 it would not beﬁt God to have a child. He is far above that: when
He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it is. 36 ‘God is my
Lord and your Lord, so serve Him: that is a straight path.’ d 37 But
a

Sawm can mean ‘abstinence’ from food or from speech.
Either she had a brother called Aaron, or was simply of Aaron’s tribe: in Arabic
‘sister/brother of’ can mean ‘relation of’, e.g. ‘brother of Hamdan’ meaning ‘of the tribe of
Hamdan’.
c See note to 3: 46. Here again the term mahd refers to any level place rather than the
concrete ‘cradle’.
d Some suggest that Muhammad is ordered to make this statement; others that it is
Jesus speaking.
b

19: 58

Mary

193

factions have diﬀered among themselves. What suﬀering will come
to those who obscure the truth when a dreadful Day arrives! 38 How
sharp of hearing, how sharp of sight they will be when they come
to Us, although now they are clearly oﬀ course! Warn them
[Muhammad] of the Day of Remorse when the matter will be
decided, 39 for they are heedless and do not believe. 40 It is We
who will inherit the earth and all who are on it: they will all be
returned to Us.
41 Mention too, in the Qur an, the story of Abraham. He was a
man of truth, a prophet. 42 He said to his father, ‘Father, why do you
worship something that can neither hear nor see nor beneﬁt you in
any way? 43 Father, knowledge that has not reached you has come to
me, so follow me: I will guide you to an even path. 44 Father, do not
worship Satan–– Satan has rebelled against the Lord of Mercy.
45 Father, I fear that a punishment from the Lord of Mercy may aﬄict
you and that you may become Satan’s companion [in Hell].’ a 46 His
father answered, ‘Abraham, do you reject my gods? I will stone you
if you do not stop this. Keep out of my way!’ 47 Abraham said, ‘Peace
be with you: I will beg my Lord to forgive you–– He is always gracious to me–– 48 but for now I will leave you, and the idols you all pray
to, and I will pray to my Lord and trust that my prayer will not be in
vain.’ 49 When he left his people and those they served beside God,
We granted him Isaac and Jacob and made them both prophets:
50 We granted Our grace to all of them, and gave them a noble
reputation.
51 Mention too, in the Qur an, the story of Moses. He was
specially chosen, a messenger and a prophet: 52 We called to him from
the right-hand side of the mountain and brought him close to Us in
secret communion; 53 out of Our grace We granted him his brother
Aaron as a prophet. 54 Mention too, in the Qur an, the story of
Ishmael. He was true to his promise, a messenger and a prophet.
55 He commanded his household to pray and give alms, and his Lord
was well pleased with him. 56 Mention too, in the Qur an, the story of
Idris. He was a man of truth, a prophet. 57 We raised him to a high
position.
58 These were the prophets God blessed–– from the seed of Adam,
of those We carried in the Ark with Noah, from the seed of Abraham
a

Or ‘that you will be a supporter of Satan’.

194

The Qur an

19: 59

and Israel–– and those We guided and chose. When the revelations of
the Lord of Mercy were recited to them, they fell to their knees and
wept, 59 but there came after them generations who neglected prayer
and were driven by their own desires. These will come face to face
with their evil, 60 but those who repent, who believe, who do righteous deeds, will enter Paradise. They will not be wronged in the
least: 61 they will enter the Gardens of Lasting Bliss, promised by the
Lord of Mercy to His servants–– it is not yet seen but truly His
promise will be fulﬁlled. 62 There they will hear only peaceful talk,
nothing bad; there they will be given provision morning and evening.
63 That is the Garden We shall give as their own to those of Our
servants who were devout.
64 [Gabriel said], a ‘We only descend [with revelation] at your
Lord’s command––everything before us, everything behind us,
everything in between, all belongs to Him––your Lord is never forgetful. 65 He is Lord of the heavens and earth and everything in
between so worship Him: be steadfast in worshipping Him. Do you
know of anyone equal to Him?’
66 Man says, ‘What? Once I am dead, will I be brought back to
life?’ 67 but does man not remember that We created him when he
was nothing before? 68 By your Lord [Prophet] We shall gather them
and the devils together and set them on their knees around Hell;
69 We shall seize out of each group those who were most disobedient
towards the Lord of Mercy–– 70 We know best who most deserves to
burn in Hell–– 71 but every single one of you b will approach it, a
decree from your Lord which must be fulﬁlled. 72 We shall save the
devout and leave the evildoers there on their knees.
73 When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, [all
that] the disbelievers say to the believers [is], ‘Which side is better
situated? Which side has the better following?’ 74 We have destroyed
many a generation before them who surpassed them in riches and
outward glitter! 75 Say [Prophet], ‘The Lord of Mercy lengthens [the
lives] of the misguided, until, when they are confronted with what
they have been warned about–– either the punishment [in this life] or
the Hour [of Judgement]–– they realize who is worse situated and
a This is a response from Gabriel to the Prophet’s request for more frequent visits
(see Bukhari, Sahih, Book of Tafsir, Sura 19).
b This is taken to refer either to the disbelievers mentioned here, or to all humanity.

19: 98

Mary

195

who has the weakest forces.’ 76 But God gives more guidance to those
who are guided, and good deeds of lasting merit are best and most
rewarding in your Lord’s sight. 77 Have you considered the man who
rejects Our revelation, who says, ‘I will certainly be given wealth and
children’? 78 Has he penetrated the unknown or received a pledge to
that eﬀect from the Lord of Mercy? 79 No! We shall certainly record
what he says and prolong his punishment: 80 We shall inherit from
him all that he speaks of and he will come to Us all alone.
81 They have taken other gods beside God to give them strength,
82 but these gods will reject their worship and will even turn against
them. 83 Have you [Prophet] not seen how We send devils to incite
the disbelievers to sin? 84 There is no need for you to be impatient
concerning them: We are counting down their [allotted] time. 85 On
the Day We gather the righteous as an honoured company before the
Lord of Mercy 86 and drive the sinful like a thirsty herd into Hell,
87 no one will have power to intercede except for those who have
permission a from the Lord of Mercy.
88 The disbelievers say, ‘The Lord of Mercy has oﬀspring.’ b 89 How
terrible is this thing you assert: 90 it almost causes the heavens to be
torn apart, the earth to split asunder, the mountains to crumble to
pieces, 91 that they attribute oﬀspring to the Lord of Mercy. 92 It does
not beﬁt the Lord of Mercy [to have oﬀspring]: 93 there is no
one in the heavens or earth who will not come to the Lord of
Mercy as a servant–– 94 He has counted them all: He has numbered
them exactly–– 95 and they will each return to Him on the Day of
Resurrection all alone.
96 But the Lord of Mercy will give love to those who believe and do
righteous deeds: 97 We have made it c easy, in your own language
[Prophet], so that you may bring glad news to the righteous and
warnings to a stubborn people. 98 How many generations We have
destroyed before them! Do you perceive a single one of them now, or
hear as much as a whisper?
For the meaning of  ahd as idhn ‘permission’ see Baydawi. Cf. 10: 3; 78: 38.
Many translators say ‘a son’ here, not realizing that walad in classical Arabic means
‘child’ or ‘children’. The discussion here is about the pagans of Mecca, who said that
the angels were daughters of God.
c Either what is said in this sura or the whole Qur an.
a
b

20. TA HA
A Meccan sura that both begins and ends with mention of the Qur an: it was
not sent to the Prophet to cause him grief but is a clear proof from his Lord.
The example of Moses is given as a lengthy account in order to encourage
the Prophet and show the end of the disbelievers. The destruction of earlier
generations is cited as a lesson from which the disbelievers should learn. The
Prophet is ordered to be patient and to persevere with his worship.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ta Ha a
2 It was not to distress you [Prophet] that We sent down the Qur an to
you, 3 but as a reminder for those who hold God in awe, 4 a revelation
from the One who created the earth and the high heaven, 5 the Lord
of Mercy, established on the throne. 6 Everything in the heavens and
on earth, everything between them, everything beneath the soil,
belongs to Him. 7 Whatever you may say aloud, He knows what you
keep secret and what is even more hidden. 8 God––there is no god
but Him––the most excellent names belong to Him.
9 Has the story of Moses come to you [Prophet]? b 10 He saw a ﬁre
and said to his people, ‘Stay here––I can see a ﬁre. Maybe I can bring
you a ﬂaming brand from it or ﬁnd some guidance there.’ 11 When he
came to the ﬁre, he was summoned, ‘Moses! 12 I am your Lord. Take
oﬀ your shoes: you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa. 13 I have
chosen you, so listen to what is being revealed. 14 I am God; there is
no god but Me. So worship Me and keep up the prayer so that you
remember Me. 15 The Hour is coming––though I choose c to keep it
hidden––for each soul to be rewarded for its labour. 16 Do not let
anyone who does not believe in it and follows his own desires distract
you from it, and so bring you to ruin.’
a There is an opinion that ta ha are not isolated letters but ‘O man!’ in the Yemeni
dialect of  Akk (Razi). For the signiﬁcance of the isolated letters as a whole, see note to 2:
1.
b This construction is an idiom in Arabic implying ‘think well about it’ or ‘take a
lesson from this’.
c Abu Muslim interprets akadu as uridu, ‘I wish’ or ‘I choose’ (Razi).

20: 50

Ta Ha

197

17 ‘Moses, what is that in your right hand?’ 18 ‘It is my staﬀ,’ he
said, ‘I lean on it; restrain my sheep with it; a I also have other uses
for it.’ 19 God said, ‘Throw it down, Moses.’ 20 He threw it down
and–– lo and behold!–– it became a fast-moving snake. 21 He said,
‘Pick it up without fear: We shall turn it back into its former state.
22 Now place your hand under your armpit and it will come out white,
though unharmed: that is another sign. 23 We do this to show you
some of Our greatest signs. 24 Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly become
a tyrant.’ 25 Moses said, ‘Lord, lift up my heart 26 and ease my task for
me. 27 Untie my tongue, 28 so that they may understand my words,
29 and give me a helper from my family, 30 my brother Aaron––
31 augment my strength through him. 32 Let him share my task 33 so
that we can glorify You much 34 and remember You often: 35 You are
always watching over us.’
36 God said, ‘Moses, your request is granted. 37 Indeed We showed
you favour before. 38 We inspired your mother, saying, 39 “Put your
child into the chest, then place him in the river. Let the river wash
him on to its bank, and he will be taken in by an enemy of Mine and
his.” I showered you with My love and planned that you should be
reared under My watchful eye. 40 Your sister went out, saying, “I will
tell you someone who will nurse him,” then We returned you to your
mother so that she could rejoice and not grieve. Later you killed a
man, but We saved you from distress and tried you with other tests.
You stayed among the people of Midian for years, then you came
here as I ordained. 41 I have chosen you for Myself. 42 Go, you and
your brother, with My signs, and make sure that you remember Me.
43 Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has exceeded all bounds.
44 Speak to him gently so that he may take heed, or show respect.’
45 They said, ‘Lord, we fear he will do us great harm or exceed all
bounds.’ 46 He said, ‘Do not be afraid, I am with you both, hearing
and seeing everything. 47 Go and tell him, “We are your Lord’s messengers, so send the Children of Israel with us and do not oppress
them. We have brought you a sign from your Lord. Peace be upon
whoever follows the right guidance; 48 it has been revealed to us that
punishment falls on whoever rejects the truth and turns his back on
it.”’
49 [Pharaoh] said, ‘Moses, who is this Lord of yours?’ 50 Moses
a

Or ‘beat down leaves for my sheep with it’.

198

The Qur an

20: 51

said, ‘Our Lord is He who gave everything its form, then gave it
guidance.’ 51 He said, ‘What about former generations?’ 52 Moses
said, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of them, all in a record; my
Lord does not err or forget.’ 53 It was He who spread out the earth for
you and traced routes in it. He sent down water from the sky. With
that water We bring forth every kind of plant, 54 so eat, and graze
your cattle. There are truly signs in all this for people of understanding. 55 From the earth We created you, into it We shall return you,
and from it We shall raise you a second time.
56 We showed Pharaoh all Our signs, but he denied them and
refused [to change]. 57 He said, ‘Have you come to drive us from
our land with your sorcery, Moses? 58 We will confront you with
sorcery to match your own: make an appointment between us which
neither of us will fail to keep, in a mutually agreeable place.’ 59 He
said, ‘Your meeting will be on the day of the feast, so let the people
be assembled when the sun has risen high.’
60 Pharaoh withdrew and gathered his resources, a then he
returned. 61 Moses said to them, ‘Beware, do not invent lies against
God or He will destroy you with His punishment. Whoever invents
lies will fail.’ 62 So they discussed their plan among themselves, talking secretly, 63 saying, ‘These two men are sorcerers. Their purpose is
to drive you out of your land with their sorcery and put an end to
your time-honoured way of life. 64 So gather your resources and line
up for the contest. Whoever wins today is sure to prosper.’ 65 They
said, ‘Moses, will you throw ﬁrst or shall we?’ 66 ‘You throw,’ said
Moses, and––lo and behold!––through their sorcery, their ropes and
staﬀs seemed to him to be moving. 67 Moses was inwardly alarmed,
68 but We said, ‘Do not be afraid, you have the upper hand. 69 Throw
down what is in your right hand: it will swallow up what they have
produced. They have only produced the tricks of a sorcerer, and a
sorcerer will not prosper, wherever he goes.’
70 [So it was, and] the sorcerers threw themselves down in submission. ‘We believe,’ they said, ‘in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.’
71 Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in him before I have given you
permission? This must be your master, the man who taught you
witchcraft. I shall certainly cut oﬀ your alternate hands and feet, b
a Literally ‘his mischief’, kaydahu. This could refer to his sorcerers or to the plots he
made.
b See note to 5: 33.

20: 87

Ta Ha

199

then crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. You will know for
certain which of us has the ﬁercer and more lasting punishment.’
72 They said, ‘We shall never prefer you to the clear sign that has
come to us, nor to Him who created us. So decide whatever you will:
you can only decide matters of this present life–– 73 we believe in our
Lord, [hoping] He may forgive us our sins and the sorcery that you
forced us to practise–– God is better and more lasting.’
74 Hell will be the reward of those who return to their Lord as
evildoers: there they will stay, neither living nor dying. 75 But those
who return to their Lord as believers with righteous deeds will be
rewarded with the highest of ranks, 76 Gardens of lasting bliss graced
with ﬂowing streams, and there they will stay. Such is the reward of
those who purify themselves.
77 We revealed to Moses, ‘Go out at night with My servants and
strike a dry path for them across the sea. a Have no fear of being
overtaken and do not be dismayed.’ 78 Pharaoh pursued them with
his armies and was overwhelmed by the sea. 79 Pharaoh truly led his
people astray; he did not guide them.
80 Children of Israel, We rescued you from your enemies. We made
a pledge with you on the right-hand side of the mountain. We sent
down manna and quails for you, 81 ‘Eat from the good things We have
provided for you, but do not overstep the bounds, or My wrath will
descend on you. Anyone on whom My wrath descends has truly
fallen. 82 Yet I am most forgiving towards those who repent, believe,
do righteous deeds, and stay on the right path.’
83 [God said], ‘Moses, what has made you come ahead of your
people in such haste?’ b 84 and he said, ‘They are following in my
footsteps. I rushed to You, Lord, to please You,’ 85 but God said, ‘We
have tested your people in your absence: the Samiri c has led them
astray.’ 86 Moses returned to his people, angry and aggrieved. He
said, ‘My people, did your Lord not make you a gracious promise?
Was my absence too long for you? Did you want anger to fall on
you from your Lord and so broke your word to me?’ 87 They said,
‘We did not break our word to you deliberately. We were burdened
with the weight of people’s jewellery, so we threw it [into the ﬁre],
Bahr, ‘sea’, means any expanse of water, fresh or salty. Cf. 35: 12.
Moses had left his people in the charge of Aaron to contemplate on Mount Sinai.
See 7: 142 ﬀ.
c Razi suggests various unsubstantiated identities for the Samiri.
a
b

200

The Qur an

20: 88

and the Samiri did the same,’ 88 but he [used the molten jewellery to]
produce an image of a calf which made a lowing sound, and they
said, ‘This is your god and Moses’ god, but he has forgotten.’ 89 Did
they not see that [the calf] gave them no answer, that it had no power
to harm or beneﬁt them? 90 Aaron did say to them, ‘My people, this
calf is a test for you. Your true Lord is the Lord of Mercy, so follow
me and obey my orders,’ 91 but they replied, ‘We shall not give up our
devotion to it until Moses returns to us.’
92 Moses said, ‘When you realized they had gone astray, what prevented you, Aaron, 93 from coming after me? How could you disobey
my orders?’ 94 He said, ‘Son of my mother–– let go of my beard and
my hair!–– I was afraid you would say, “You have caused division
among the children of Israel and have not heeded what I said.”’
95 Moses said, ‘And what was the matter with you, Samiri?’ 96 He
replied, ‘I saw something they did not; I took in some of the teachings of the Messenger but tossed them aside: a my soul prompted me
to do what I did.’ 97 Moses said, ‘Get away from here! Your lot in this
life is to say, “Do not touch me,” b but you have an appointment from
which there is no escape. Look at your god which you have kept on
worshipping–– we shall grind it down c and scatter it into the sea.
98 [People], your true god is the One God–– there is no god but
Him–– whose knowledge embraces everything.’
99 In this way We relate to you [Prophet] stories of what happened
before. We have given you a Qur an from Us. 100 Whoever turns away
from it will bear on the Day of Resurrection a heavy burden101 and
will remain under it. What a terrible burden to carry on that Day!
102 When the trumpet is sounded and We gather the sinful, sightless, d
103 they will murmur to one another, ‘You stayed only ten days [on
earth]’–– 104 We know best what they say–– but the more perceptive of
them will say, ‘Your stay [on earth] was only a single day.’
105 They ask you [Prophet] about the mountains: say, ‘[On that
Day] my Lord will blast them into dust 106 and leave a ﬂat plain,
107 with no peak or trough to be seen. 108 On that Day, people will
follow the summoner from whom there is no escape; every voice will
be hushed for the Lord of Mercy; only whispers will be heard. 109 On
Literally ‘I took a handful from the trail of the messenger and ﬂung it . . .’.
Another interpretation is that the Samiri will become a social outcast.
c Harraqa in classical usage has the meaning ‘grind’, as used here, rather than ‘burn’.
d Zurq from azraq, which means, among other things, ‘blind’. Cf. verses 124–6.
a
b

20: 127

Ta Ha

201

that Day, intercession will be useless except from those to whom
the Lord of Mercy has granted permission and whose words He
approves–– 110 He knows what is before and behind them, though
they do not comprehend Him–– 111 and [all] faces a will be humbled
before the Living, Ever Watchful One. Those burdened with evil
deeds will despair, 112 but whoever has done righteous deeds and
believed need have no fear of injustice or deprivation.’ 113 We have
sent the Qur an down in the Arabic tongue and given all kinds of
warnings in it, so that they may beware or take heed–– 114 exalted be
God, the one who is truly in control.
[Prophet], do not rush to recite before the revelation is fully
complete b but say, ‘Lord, increase me in knowledge!’ 115 We also
commanded Adam before you, but he forgot and We found him
lacking in constancy. 116 When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down
before Adam,’ they did. But Iblis refused, 117 so We said, ‘Adam, this
is your enemy, yours and your wife’s: do not let him drive you out of
the garden and make you miserable. 118 In the garden you will never
go hungry, feel naked, 119 be thirsty, or suﬀer the heat of the sun.’
120 But Satan whispered to Adam, saying, ‘Adam, shall I show you
the tree of immortality and power that never decays?’ 121 and they
both ate from it. They became conscious of their nakedness and
began to cover themselves with leaves from the garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and was led astray–– 122 later his Lord brought him
close, accepted his repentance, and guided him–– 123 God said, ‘Get
out of the garden as each other’s enemy.’ c
Whoever follows My guidance, when it comes to you [people],
will not go astray nor fall into misery, 124 but whoever turns away
from it will have a life of great hardship. We shall bring him blind to
the Assembly on the Day of Resurrection 125 and he will say, ‘Lord,
why did You bring me here blind? I was sighted before!’ 126 God will
say, ‘This is how it is: You ignored Our revelations when they came
to you, so today you will be ignored.’ 127 This is how We reward those
who go too far, and who do not believe in their Lord’s revelations.
The greatest and most enduring punishment is in the Hereafter.
a

This can also mean ‘their faces’.
Muhammad, when repeating to Gabriel each revelation, after the angel delivered it,
sometimes in his eagerness started repeating even before Gabriel had ﬁnished revealing.
See also 75: 16–19.
c Both parties, cf. 2: 36 and note.
b

202

20: 128

The Qur an

128 Do they not draw a lesson from the many generations We
destroyed before them, through whose dwelling places they now
walk? There truly are signs in this for anyone with understanding!
129 If it were not for a preordained Word from your Lord [Prophet],
they would already have been destroyed. Their time has been set,
130 so [Prophet] be patient with what they say–– celebrate the praise
of your Lord, before the rising and setting of the sun, celebrate His
praise during the night, and at the beginning and end of the day, so
that you may ﬁnd contentment–– 131 and do not gaze longingly at
what We have given some of them to enjoy, the ﬁnery of this present
life: We test them through this, but the provision of your Lord is
better and more lasting. 132 Order your people a to pray, and pray
steadfastly yourself. We are not asking you to give Us provision; b
We provide for you, and the rewards of the Hereafter belong to the
devout.
133 The disbelievers say, ‘Why does he not bring us a sign from his
Lord?’ Have they not been given clear proof conﬁrming what was
in the earlier scriptures? 134 If We had destroyed them through
punishment before this Messenger came, they would have said,
‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we could have followed
Your revelations before we suﬀered humiliation and disgrace!’
135 [Prophet], say, ‘We are all waiting, so you carry on waiting: you
will come to learn who has followed the even path, and been rightly
guided.’
a

Or ‘your family’.

b

Cf. 51: 57.

21. THE PROPHETS
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the list of prophets mentioned from verse
48 to verse 91. It stresses that fact that Muhammad is a man like earlier prophets,
and has been given the same message to declare the unity of God. It warns the
disbelievers of the approaching Judgement from which there is no escape.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ever closer to people draws their reckoning, while they turn away,
heedless. 2 Whenever any fresh revelation comes to them from their
Lord, they listen to it playfully 3 with frivolous hearts. The evildoers
conferred in secret: ‘Is this man anything but a mortal like yourselves? Are you going to fall under his spell with your eyes wide
open?’ 4 He said, a ‘My Lord knows everything that is said in the
heavens and the earth: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’
5 Some say, ‘Muddled dreams’; others, ‘He made it up’; yet others,
‘He is just a poet, let him show us a sign as previous messengers
did.’ 6 But of the communities We destroyed before them not a single
one believed. Will these now believe? 7 And even before your time
[Prophet], all the messengers We sent were only men We inspired––
if you [disbelievers] do not know, ask people who know the Scripture––8 We did not give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they
immortal. 9 We fulﬁlled Our promise to them in the end: We saved
them and those We wished to save, and We destroyed those who
exceeded all bounds.
10 And now We have sent down to you [people] a Scripture to
remind you. Will you not use your reason? 11 How many communities of evildoers We have destroyed! How many others We
have raised up in their places! 12 When they felt Our might coming
upon them, see how they tried to escape it! 13 ‘Do not try to escape.
Go back to your homes and the pleasure you revelled in: you
may be questioned.’ 14 They said, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’
15 and that cry of theirs did not cease until We made them burnt-oﬀ
stubble.
a

Here and in verse 112 an alternative reading is the imperative, qul (‘say’).

204

The Qur an

21: 16

16 We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything
between them playfully. 17 If We had wished for a pastime, We could
have found it within Us–– if We had wished for any such thing. 18 No!
We hurl the truth against falsehood, and truth obliterates it–– see
how falsehood vanishes away! Woe to you [people] for the way you
describe God! 19 Everyone in the heavens and earth belongs to Him,
and those that are with Him are never too proud to worship Him,
nor do they grow weary; 20 they glorify Him tirelessly night and day.
21 Have they chosen any gods from the earth who can give life to
the dead? 22 If there had been in the heavens or earth any gods but
Him, both heavens and earth would be in ruins: God, Lord of the
Throne, is far above the things they say: 23 He cannot be called to
account for anything He does, whereas they will be called to account.
24 Have they chosen to worship other gods instead of Him? Say,
‘Bring your proof. This is the Scripture for those who are with me
and the Scripture for those who went before me.’ But most of them
do not recognize the truth, so they pay no heed. 25 We never sent any
messenger before you [Muhammad] without revealing to him:
‘There is no god but Me, so serve Me.’ 26 And they say, ‘The Lord of
Mercy has taken oﬀspring for Himself.’ a May He be exalted! No!
They are only His honoured servants: 27 they do not speak before He
speaks and they act by His command. 28 He knows what is before
them and what is behind them, and they cannot intercede without
His permission b ––indeed they themselves stand in awe of Him. 29 If
any of them were to claim, ‘I am a god beside Him,’ We would
reward them with Hell: this is how We reward evildoers.
30 Are the disbelievers not aware that the heavens and the earth
used to be joined together and that We ripped them apart, that We
made every living thing from water? Will they not believe? 31 And
We put ﬁrm mountains on the earth, lest it should sway under them,
and set broad paths on it, so that they might follow the right direction, 32 and We made the sky a well-secured canopy–– yet from its
wonders they turn away. 33 It is He who created night and day,
the sun and the moon, each ﬂoating in its orbit. 34 We have not
granted everlasting life to any other human being before you either
[Muhammad]–– if you die, will [the disbelievers] live for ever?
a
b

The Meccan polytheists claimed the angels were God’s daughters.
See 20: 109.

21: 56

The Prophets

205

35 Every soul is certain to taste death: We test you all through the bad
and the good, and to Us you will all return. 36 When the disbelievers
see you, they laugh at you: ‘Is this the one who talks about your
gods?’ They reject any talk of the Lord of Mercy.
37 Man was created hasty: I will show you My signs soon, so do not
ask Me to hasten them. 38 They say, ‘When will this promise be
fulﬁlled, if what you say is true?’ 39 If the disbelievers only knew, the
time will arrive when they will not be able to ward oﬀ the Fire from
their faces or their backs, and they will get no help. 40 It will come
upon them suddenly and stupefy them; they will be powerless to
push it away; they will not be reprieved.
41 Messengers before you [Muhammad] were also ridiculed, but
those who mocked them were overwhelmed in the end by the very
thing they had mocked. 42 Say, ‘Who could protect you night and day
from the Lord of Mercy?’ Yet they turn away when their Lord is
mentioned. 43 Do they have gods who can defend them against Us?
Their gods have no power to help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us. 44 We have allowed these sinners and their forefathers to enjoy life for a long time. But do they not see how We are
shrinking their borders? Is it they who will prevail? 45 Say, ‘I warn
you only through the Revelation.’ The deaf will not hear the warning
call, 46 yet if a mere breath of your Lord’s punishment touches
them, they will be sure to cry, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’ 47 We
will set up scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection so that no
one can be wronged in the least, and if there should be even the
weight of a mustard seed, We shall bring it out–– We take excellent
account.
48 We gave Moses and Aaron [the Scripture] that distinguishes
right from wrong, a light and a reminder for those who are mindful
of God, 49 those who stand in awe of their Lord, though He is
unseen, and who fear the Hour. 50 This [Qur an] too is a blessed
message We have sent down–– are you [people] going to deny it?
51 Long ago We bestowed right judgement on Abraham and We knew
him well. 52 He said to his father and his people, ‘What are these
images to which you are so devoted?’ 53 They replied, ‘We found our
fathers worshipping them.’ 54 He said, ‘You and your fathers have
clearly gone astray.’ 55 They asked, ‘Have you brought us the truth or
are you just playing about?’ 56 He said, ‘Listen! Your true Lord is the
Lord of the heavens and the earth, He who created them, and I am a

206

The Qur an

21: 57

witness to this. 57 By God I shall certainly plot against your idols as
soon as you have turned your backs!’ 58 He broke them all into pieces,
but left the biggest one for them to return to. 59 They said, ‘Who has
done this to our gods? How wicked he must be!’ 60 Some said, ‘We
heard a youth called Abraham talking about them.’ 61 They said,
‘Bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness
[his trial].’ 62 They asked, ‘Was it you, Abraham, who did this to our
gods?’ 63 He said, ‘No, it was done by the biggest of them–– this one.
Ask them, if they can talk.’ 64 They turned to one another, saying, ‘It
is you who are in the wrong,’ 65 but then they lapsed again and said,
‘You know very well these gods cannot speak.’ 66 Abraham said, ‘How
can you worship what can neither beneﬁt nor harm you, instead of
God? 67 Shame on you and on the things you worship instead of God.
Have you no sense?’ 68 They said, ‘Burn him and avenge your gods, if
you are going to do the right thing.’ 69 But We said, ‘Fire, be cool and
safe for Abraham.’ 70 They planned to harm him, but We made them
suﬀer the greatest loss. 71 We saved him and Lot [and sent them] to
the land We blessed for all people, 72 and We gave him Isaac and Jacob
as an additional gift, and made each of them righteous. 73 We made all
of them leaders, guiding others by Our command, and We inspired
them to do good works, to keep up the prayer, and to give alms: they
were Our true worshippers. 74 We gave Lot sound judgement and
knowledge and saved him from the community who practised
obscenities–– they were shameless people who broke God’s law! 75 We
admitted him to Our mercy; he was a righteous man.
76 Long before that, We answered Noah when he cried out to Us:
We saved him and his family from the great calamity 77 and We
helped him against the people who rejected Our signs–– they were
evil people, so We drowned them all.
78 And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgement
regarding the ﬁeld into which sheep strayed by night and grazed. We
witnessed their judgement 79 and made Solomon understand the case
[better], though We gave sound judgement and knowledge to both of
them. We made the mountains and the birds celebrate Our praises
with David–– We did all these things–– 80 We taught him how to make
coats of mail for the beneﬁt of you [people], to protect you in your
wars, but are you grateful for this? 81 We harnessed the stormy wind
for Solomon, so that it sped by his command to the land We had
blessed–– We have knowledge of all things–– 82 and We made some of

21: 100

The Prophets

207

the jinn a subservient to him, to dive for him and do other works
besides. We were watching over them.
83 Remember Job, when he cried to his Lord, ‘Suﬀering has truly
aﬄicted me, but you are the Most Merciful of the merciful.’ 84 We
answered him, removed his suﬀering, and restored his family to him,
along with more like them, as an act of grace from Us and a reminder
for all who serve Us. 85 And remember Ishmael, Idris, and Dhu’lKiﬂ: b they were all steadfast. 86 We admitted them to Our mercy;
they were truly righteous. 87 And remember the man with the whale, c
when he went oﬀ angrily, thinking We could not restrict him,
but then he cried out in the deep darkness, ‘There is no God but
You, glory be to You, I was wrong.’ 88 We answered him and saved
him from distress: this is how We save the faithful. 89 Remember
Zachariah, when he cried to his Lord, ‘My Lord, do not leave me
childless, though You are the best of heirs.’ 90 We answered him–– We
gave him John, and cured his wife of barrenness–– they were always
keen to do good deeds. They called upon Us out of longing and awe,
and humbled themselves before Us. 91 Remember the one who
guarded her chastity. d We breathed into her from Our Spirit and
made her and her son a sign for all people.
92 [Messengers], e this community of yours is one single community
and I am your Lord, so serve Me. 93 They have torn their unity apart,
but they will all return to Us. 94 If anyone does good deeds and is
a believer, his eﬀorts will not be ignored: We record them for
him. 95 No community destroyed by Us can escape its return, f 96 and
when the peoples of Gog and Magog are let loose and swarm swiftly
from every highland, 97 when the True Promise draws near, the
disbelievers’ eyes will stare in terror, and they will say, ‘Woe to us!
We were not aware of this at all. We were wrong.’ 98 You [disbelievers] and what you worship instead of God will be fuel for
Hell: that is where you will go–– 99 if these [idols] had been real gods
they would not have gone there–– you will all stay there. 100 There
Cf. 34: 12–13.
Some commentators suggest this refers to the prophet Ezekiel. See Encyclopaedia
of Islam under Dhu’l-Kiﬂ.
c Jonah. Cf. 37: 139–48.
d Mary. Cf. 66: 12.
e Cf. 23: 51–3.
f Other interpretations are: ‘they will not return to the world’; ‘they will not turn
away from their misdeeds’.
a
b

208

The Qur an

21: 101

the disbelievers will be groaning piteously, but the [idols] will hear
nothing.
101 But those for whom We have decreed Paradise will be kept far
from Hell–– 102 they will not hear a murmur from it–– and endlessly
they will enjoy everything their souls desire. 103 They will have no
fear of the great Terror: a the angels will receive them with the
words, ‘This is the Day you were promised!’ 104 On that Day, We shall
roll up the skies as a writer rolls up [his] scrolls. We shall reproduce
creation just as We produced it the ﬁrst time: this is Our binding
promise. We shall certainly do all these things.
105 We wrote in the Psalms, as We did in [earlier] Scripture: ‘My
righteous servants will inherit the earth.’ 106 There truly is a message
in this for the servants of God! 107 It was only as a mercy that We sent
you [Prophet] to all people. b 108 Say, ‘What is revealed to me is that
your God is one God–– will you submit to Him?’ 109 But if they turn
away, say, ‘I have proclaimed the message fairly to you all. I do not
know whether the judgement you are promised is near or far, 110 but
He knows what you reveal and conceal. 111 I do not know: this [time]
may well be a test for you, and enjoyment for a while.’ 112 He said, c
‘My Lord, pass the true judgement.’ And, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of
Mercy. We seek His assistance against what you [disbelievers] say.’
a

The Day of Judgement.
Or ‘We sent you [Prophet] only as a mercy to all people’.
c See note to verse 4.
b

22. THE PILGRIMAGE
A Medinan sura that gets its title from the reference to the sacred rite of the
pilgrimage ﬁrst enacted by Abraham (verse 27). This theme is introduced by the
condemnation of those who bar the believers from access to the Sacred Mosque
and is followed by permission to ﬁght when attacked. The sura begins with the
Day of Judgement and castigates those who worship useless idols, describing
them later as powerless to create even a ﬂy. The sura ends by urging the
Muslims to persevere in following the faith of Abraham.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 People, be mindful of your Lord, for the earthquake of the Last
Hour will be a mighty thing: 2 on the Day you see it, every nursing
mother will think no more of her baby, every pregnant female will
miscarry, you will think people are drunk when they are not, so
severe will be God’s torment. 3 Yet still there are some who, with no
knowledge, argue about God, who follow every devilish rebel 4 fated
to lead astray those who take his side, and guide them to the suﬀering
of the blazing ﬂame.
5 People, [remember,] if you doubt the Resurrection, that We
created you from dust, then a drop of ﬂuid, then a clinging form,
then a lump of ﬂesh, both shaped and unshaped: We mean to make
Our power clear to you. Whatever We choose We cause to remain in
the womb for an appointed time, then We bring you forth as infants
and then you grow and reach maturity. Some die young and some
are left to live on to such an age that they forget all they once knew.
You sometimes see the earth lifeless, yet when We send down water it
stirs and swells and produces every kind of joyous growth: 6 this is
because God is the Truth; He brings the dead back to life; He has
power over everything.
7 There is no doubt that the Last Hour is bound to come, nor that
God will raise the dead from their graves, 8 yet still there are some
who, with no knowledge or guidance or any book of enlightenment,
argue about God, 9 turning scornfully aside to lead others away from
God’s path. Disgrace in this world awaits such a person and, on the
Day of Resurrection, We shall make him taste the suﬀering of the

210

The Qur an

22: 10

Fire. 10 [It will be said], ‘This is for what you have stored up with
your own hands: God is never unjust to His creatures.’
11 There are also some who serve God with unsteady faith: if
something good comes their way, they are satisﬁed, but if they
are tested, they revert to their old ways, losing both this world
and the next–– that is the clearest loss.12 Instead of God, they call
upon what can neither harm nor help them–– that is straying far
away–– 13 or invoke one whose harm is closer than his help: an
evil master and an evil companion. 14 But God will admit those
who believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams. God does whatever He wishes. 15 Anyone who thinks that
God will not support him in this world and the next should stretch
a rope up to the sky, climb all the way up it, a and see whether
this strategy removes the cause of his anger. 16 In this way, We send
the Qur an down as clear messages, and God guides whoever He
will.
17 As for the believers, those who follow the Jewish faith, the
Sabians, b the Christians, the Magians, c and the idolaters, God will
judge between them on the Day of Resurrection; God witnesses all
things. 18 Do you not realize [Prophet] that everything in the heavens
and earth submits d to God: the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and the animals? So do many human beings, though
for many others punishment is well deserved. Anyone disgraced by
God will have no one to honour him: God does whatever He will.
19 These two kinds of people disagree about their Lord. Garments of
ﬁre will be tailored for those who disbelieve; scalding water will be
poured over their heads, 20 melting their insides as well as their skins;
21 there will be iron crooks to restrain them; 22 whenever, in their
anguish, they try to escape, they will be pushed back in and told,
‘Taste the suﬀering of the Fire.’ 23 But God will admit those who
believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams;
there they will be adorned with golden bracelets and pearls; there
they will have silken garments. 24 They were guided to good speech
and to the path of the One Worthy of all Praise.
a See also 6: 35. Another interpretation of this verse is ‘stretch a rope up to the ceiling
and hang himself ’.
b See note to 2: 62.
c Followers of an ancient Persian and Median religion, based on monotheism,
identiﬁed with Zoroastrians.
d Literally, prostrates.

22: 37

The Pilgrimage

211

25 As for the disbelievers, who bar others from God’s path and
from the Sacred Mosque–– which We made for all people, residents
and visitors alike–– and who try to violate it with wrongdoing, We
shall make them taste a painful punishment. 26 We showed Abraham
the site of the House, saying, ‘Do not assign partners to Me. Purify
My House for those who circle around it, those who stand to
pray, and those who bow and prostrate themselves. 27 Proclaim the
Pilgrimage to all people. They will come to you on foot and on every
kind of swift mount, emerging from every deep mountain pass 28 to
attain beneﬁts and celebrate God’s name, on speciﬁed days, over the
livestock He has provided for them–– feed yourselves and the poor
and unfortunate–– 29 so let the pilgrims perform their acts of cleansing, fulﬁl their vows, and circle around the Ancient House.’ 30 All this
[is ordained by God]: anyone who honours the sacred ordinances of
God will have good rewards from his Lord.
Livestock have been made lawful to you, except for what has been
explicitly forbidden. Shun the ﬁlth of idolatrous beliefs and practices
and shun false utterances. a 31 Devote yourselves to God and assign
Him no partners, for the person who does so is like someone who has
been hurled down from the skies and snatched up by the birds or
ﬂung to a distant place by the wind. 32 All this [is ordained by God]:
those who honour God’s rites show the piety of their hearts. 33 Livestock are useful to you until the set time. Then their place of sacriﬁce
is near the Ancient House: 34 We appointed acts of devotion for every
community, for them to celebrate God’s name over the livestock He
provided for them: your God is One, so devote yourselves to Him.
[Prophet], give good news to the humble 35 whose hearts ﬁll with awe
whenever God is mentioned, who endure whatever happens to them
with patience, who keep up the prayer, who give to others out of Our
provision to them.
36 We have made camels b part of God’s sacred rites for you. There
is much good in them for you, so invoke God’s name over them as
they are lined up for sacriﬁce, then, when they have fallen down
dead, feed yourselves and those who do not ask, as well as those who
do. We have subjected them to you in this way so that you may be
thankful. 37 It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches God
a
b

Dedicating animals to idols.
The term budn can refer to either camels or cows.

212

The Qur an

22: 38

but your piety. He has subjected them to you in this way so that you
may glorify God for having guided you.
Give good news to those who do good: 38 God will defend the
believers; God does not love the unfaithful or the ungrateful.
39 Those who have been attacked are permitted to take up arms
because they have been wronged–– God has the power to help
them–– 40 those who have been driven unjustly from their homes only
for saying, ‘Our Lord is God.’ If God did not repel some people by
means of others, many monasteries, churches, synagogues, and
mosques, where God’s name is much invoked, would have been
destroyed. God is sure to help those who help His cause–– God is
strong and mighty–– 41 those who, when We establish them in the
land, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, command what
is right, and forbid what is wrong: God controls the outcome of
all events.
42 If they reject you [Prophet], so did the people of Noah before
them, and those of  Ad, Thamud, 43 Abraham, Lot, 44 Midian. Moses
too was called a liar. I gave the disbelievers time, but in the end I
punished them. How I condemned them! 45 How many towns
steeped in wrongdoing We have destroyed and left in total ruin; how
many deserted wells; how many lofty palaces! 46 Have these people
[of Mecca] not travelled through the land with hearts to understand
and ears to hear? It is not people’s eyes that are blind, but their hearts
within their breasts.
47 They will challenge you [Prophet] to hasten the punishment.
God will not fail in His promise–– a Day with your Lord is like a
thousand years by your reckoning. 48 To many a town steeped in
wrongdoing I gave more time and then struck them down: they all
return to Me in the end.
49 Say [Prophet], ‘People, I am sent only to give you clear warning.’
50 Those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven and have a
generous reward, 51 but those who strive to oppose Our messages and
try in vain to defeat Us are destined for the Blaze. 52 We have never
sent any messenger or prophet before you [Muhammad] into whose
wishes Satan did not insinuate something, but God removes a what
Satan insinuates and then God aﬃrms His message. God is all
a The basic meaning of nasakha is ‘removed’ rather than ‘abrogated’ (al-Mu jam
al-Wasit).

22: 70

The Pilgrimage

213

knowing and wise: 53 He makes Satan’s insinuations a temptation
only for the sick at heart and those whose hearts are hardened–– the
evildoers are profoundly opposed [to the Truth]–– 54 and He causes
those given knowledge to realize that this Revelation is your
Lord’s Truth, so that they may believe in it and humble their
hearts to Him: God guides the faithful to the straight path. 55 The
disbelievers will remain in doubt about it until the Hour suddenly
overpowers them or until torment descends on them on a Day
devoid of all hope. 56 On that Day control will belong to God:
He will judge between them. Those who believe and do good
deeds will be admitted to Gardens of Delight, 57 while those who
disbelieve and reject Our revelations will receive a humiliating
torment.
58 He will give a generous provision to those who migrated in
God’s way and were killed or died. He is the Best Provider. 59 He will
admit them to a place that will please them: God is all knowing and
most forbearing. 60 So it will be. God will help those who retaliate
against an aggressive act merely with its like and are then wronged
again: God is pardoning and most forgiving. 61 So it will be, because
God makes night pass into day, and day into night, and He is all
hearing and all seeing. 62 So it will be, because it is God alone who is
the Truth, and whatever else they invoke is sheer falsehood: it is God
who is the Most High, the Most Great.
63 Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down
from the sky and the next morning the earth becomes green? God is
truly most subtle, all aware; 64 everything in the heavens and earth
belongs to Him; God alone is self-suﬃcient, worthy of all praise.
65 Have you not considered how God has made everything on the
earth of service to you? That ships sail the sea at His command?
That He keeps the heavens from falling down on the earth without
His permission? God is most compassionate and most merciful to
mankind–– 66 it is He who gave you [people] life, will cause you to die,
then will give you life again–– but man is ungrateful.
67 We have appointed acts of devotion for every community to
observe, so do not let them argue with you [Prophet] about this
matter. Call them to your Lord–– you are on the right path–– 68 and if
they argue with you, say, ‘God is well aware of what you are doing.’
69 On the Day of Resurrection, God will judge between you regarding your diﬀerences. 70 Are you [Prophet] not aware that God knows

214

22: 71

The Qur an

all that is in the heavens and earth? All this is written in a Record;
this is easy for God.
71 Yet beside God they serve that for which He has sent no authority and of which they have no knowledge: a the evildoers will have no
one to help them. 72 [Prophet], you can see the hostility on the faces
of the disbelievers when Our messages are recited clearly to them: it
is almost as if they are going to attack those who recite Our messages
to them. Say, ‘Shall I tell you what is far worse than what you feel
now? The Fire that God has promised the disbelievers! What a
dismal end!’ 73 People, here is an illustration, so listen carefully: those
you call on beside God could not, even if they combined all their
forces, create a ﬂy, and if a ﬂy took something away from them, they
would not be able to retrieve it. How feeble are the petitioners and
how feeble are those they petition! 74 They have no grasp of God’s
true measure: God is truly most strong and mighty.
75 God chooses messengers from among the angels and from
among men. God is all hearing, all seeing: 76 He knows what lies
before and behind them. All matters return to Him. 77 Believers, bow
down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do good so that
you may succeed. 78 Strive hard for God as is His due: He has
chosen you and placed no hardship in your religion, the faith of your
forefather Abraham. God has called you Muslims b ––both in the past
and in this [message]––so that the Messenger can bear witness about
you and so that you can bear witness about other people. So keep up
the prayer, give the prescribed alms, and seek refuge in God: He is
your protector––an excellent protector and an excellent helper.
a

i.e. ‘scriptural knowledge’.

b

i.e. ‘devoted to God’.

23. THE BELIEVERS
A Meccan sura which stresses that the believers are the ones who will succeed,
whereas the disbelievers will be punished for their arrogance and derision.
Several proofs are given of God’s Oneness and His power, and the inevitability
of the Resurrection is emphasized.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 [How] prosperous are the believers! 2 Those who pray humbly,
3 who shun idle talk, 4 who pay the prescribed alms, 5 who guard their
chastity 6 except with their spouses or their slaves a ––with these they
are not to blame, 7 but anyone who seeks more than this is exceeding
the limits––8 who are faithful to their trusts and pledges 9 and who
keep up their prayers, 10 will rightly be given 11 Paradise as their
own, b there to remain.
12 We created man from an essence of clay, 13 then We placed him as
a drop of ﬂuid in a safe place, 14 then We made that drop into a
clinging form, and We made that form into a lump of ﬂesh, and We
made that lump into bones, and We clothed those bones with
ﬂesh, and later We made him into other forms c ––glory be to God,
the best of creators!––15 then you will die 16 and then, on the Day of
Resurrection, you will be raised up again.
17 We created seven levels d above you: We are never unmindful of
Our creation. 18 We sent water down from the sky in due measure
and lodged it in the earth––We have the power to take it all away if
We so wish––19 with it We produced for you gardens of date palms
and vines, with many fruits there for you to eat, 20 and a tree, growing
out of Mount Sinai, that produces oil and seasoning for your food.
21 There is a lesson for you in livestock: We produce milk for you to
drink from their bellies. And they have many other beneﬁts: you eat
them 22 and you ride on them, as you do in ships.
Cf. 4: 25.
Literally ‘will be the heirs to “inherit” Paradise’, but they do not inherit from
anyone who dies.
c Razi quotes Ibn  Abbas to explain ‘other forms’ as referring to all the various stages
of infancy, childhood, and maturity––cf. 22: 5; 40: 67.
d Tara iq: ‘levels (of heaven)’ or ‘highways’ (Razi).
a
b

216

The Qur an

23: 23

23 We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God, for
He is your only god. Will you not heed Him?’ 24 But the leading
disbelievers among his people said, ‘He is merely a mortal like
you, trying to gain some superiority over you. God would have
sent down angels if He had wished; besides, we never heard of
anything like this from our forefathers. 25 He is just a madman, so
let’s wait and see what happens to him.’ 26 Noah said, ‘My Lord, help
me! They call me a liar,’ 27 and so We revealed to him: ‘Build the
Ark under Our watchful eye and according to Our revelation.
When Our command comes and water gushes up out of the earth, a
take pairs of every species on board, and your family, except for
those on whom the sentence has already been passed–– do not plead
with me for the evildoers: they will be drowned–– 28 and when
you and your companions are settled on the Ark, say, “Praise be to
God, who delivered us from the wicked people,” 29 and say, “My
Lord, let me land with Your blessing: it is You who provide the best
landings”.’ 30 There are signs in all this: We have always put [people]
to the test.
31 Then We raised another generation after them, 32 and sent one of
their own as a messenger: ‘Serve God, for He is your only god. Will
you not heed Him?’ 33 But the leading disbelievers among his
people, who denied the Meeting in the Hereafter, to whom We had
granted ease and plenty in this life, said, ‘He is just a mortal like
you–– he eats what you eat and drinks what you drink–– 34 and you
will really be losers if you obey a mortal like yourselves. 35 How can
he promise you that after you die and become dust and bones you
will be brought out alive? 36 What you are promised is very farfetched. 37 There is only the life of this world: we die, we live, b but we
will never be resurrected. 38 He is just a man making lies up about
God. We will never believe in him.’ 39 The prophet said, ‘My Lord,
help me! They call me a liar,’ 40 and so God said, ‘Soon they will be
ﬁlled with regret.’ 41 The blast justly struck them and We swept them
away like scum. Away with the evildoers! 42 We raised other generations after them–– 43 no community can advance or delay its time––
44 and We sent Our messengers in succession: whenever a messenger
came to a community they invariably called him a liar, so We
a
b

Literally ‘the furnace boils over’.
Razi interprets this order to mean successive generations.

23: 71

The Believers

217

destroyed them one after the other and made them into cautionary
tales. Away with the disbelievers!
45 Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and
clear authority, 46 to Pharaoh and his prominent leaders, but they
responded with arrogance: they were a haughty people. 47 They said,
‘Are we to believe in two mortals like us? And their people are our
servants?’ 48 and so they called them both liars: they became another
ruined people. 49 We gave Moses the Scripture, so that they a might
be rightly guided. 50 We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign;
We gave them shelter on a peaceful hillside with ﬂowing water. b
51 Messengers, eat good things and do good deeds: I am well aware
of what you do. 52 This community of yours is one–– and I am your
Lord: be mindful of Me–– 53 but they have split their community into
sects, each rejoicing in their own. 54 So [Muhammad] leave them for a
while steeped [in their ignorance]. 55 Do they reckon that, by giving
them wealth and sons, 56 We race to give them good things? They
really have no idea! 57 Those who stand in awe of their Lord, 58 who
believe in His messages, 59 who do not ascribe partners to Him, 60 who
always give with hearts that tremble at the thought that they must
return to Him, 61 are the ones who race toward good things, and they
will be the ﬁrst to get them. 62 We do not burden any soul with more
than it can bear–– We have a Record that tells the truth–– they will
not be wronged. 63 But the disbelievers’ hearts are steeped [in ignorance of ] all this; and there are other things besides this that they
do. 64 When We bring Our punishment on those corrupted with
wealth, they will cry for help: 65 ‘Do not cry out today: you will get
no help from Us. 66 Time and time again My messages were recited
to you, but you turned arrogantly on your heels, 67 and spent the
evening making fun of [the Qur an].’
68 Have they not contemplated the Word of God? Has something
come to them that did not come to their forefathers? 69 Do they not
recognize their Messenger? So why do they reject him? 70 Why do
they say he is possessed? He has brought them the truth and most of
them hate it, 71 but if the truth were in accordance with their desires,
the heavens, the earth, and everyone in them would disintegrate.
We have brought them their Reminder and they turn away from it.
a ‘His people’––Moses was given the Scripture later, so ‘they’ only refers to the
children of Israel.
b Where Mary gave birth; see 19: 22–6.

218

The Qur an

23: 72

72 Do you [Prophet] ask them for any payment? Your Lord’s is the best
payment: He is the Best of Providers. 73 You call them to a straight
path 74 and those who do not believe in the Hereafter turn away from
that path. 75 Even if We were to show them mercy and relieve them of
distress, they would blindly persist in their transgression. 76 We have
already aﬄicted them, yet they did not submit to their Lord: they
will not humble themselves 77 until We open a gate to severe torment
for them–– then they will be plunged into utter despair.
78 It is God who endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts––
how seldom you are grateful! 79 It is He who made you multiply on
earth. It is to Him that you will be gathered: 80 it is He who gives life
and death; the alternation of night and day depends on Him; will
you not use your minds? 81 But, like others before them, 82 they say,
‘What? When we die and turn to dust and bones, shall we really be
resurrected? 83 We have heard such promises before, and so did our
forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’ 84 Say [Prophet], ‘Who
owns the earth and all who live in it, if you know [so much]?’ 85 and
they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not take heed?’ 86 Say, ‘Who is
the Lord of the seven heavens? Who is the Lord of the Mighty
Throne?’ 87 and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not be mindful?’
88 Say, ‘Who holds control of everything in His hand? Who protects,
while there is no protection against Him, if you know [so much]?’
89 and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Then how can you be so deluded?’
90 The fact is, We brought them the truth and they are lying. 91 God
has never had a child. Nor is there any god beside Him–– if there
were, each god would have taken his creation aside and tried to overcome the others. May God be exalted above what they describe! 92 He
knows what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is far above any
partner they claim for Him. 93 Say, ‘Lord, if You are going to show me
the punishment You have promised them, 94 then Lord, do not
include me among the evildoers!’ 95 We certainly are able to show you
the punishment We have promised them. 96 Repel evil with good––
We are well aware of what they attribute to Us–– 97 and say, ‘Lord, I
take refuge with You from the goadings of the evil ones; 98 I seek
refuge with you, Lord, so that they may not come near me.’
99 When death comes to one of them, he cries, ‘My Lord, let me
return 100 so as to make amends for the things I neglected.’ Never!
This will not go beyond his words: a barrier stands behind such
people until the very Day they are resurrected. 101 On that Day when

23: 118

The Believers

219

the Trumpet is blown, the ties between them will be as nothing and
they will not ask about each other: 102 those whose good deeds weigh
heavy will be successful, 103 but those whose balance is light will have
lost their souls for ever and will stay in Hell–– 104 the Fire will scorch
their faces and their lips will be twisted in pain. 105 ‘Were My
messages not recited over and over to you and still you rejected
them?’ 106 They will say, ‘Lord, our waywardness overcame us and we
went astray. 107 Lord, take us away from this and if we go back to our
old ways, then we shall really be evildoers.’ 108 He will say, ‘Away with
you! In you go! Do not speak to Me! 109 Among My servants there
were those who said, “Lord, We believe. Forgive us and have mercy
on us: You are the most merciful of all.” 110 But you kept on laughing at them: so intent were you on laughing at them that it made
you forget My warning. 111 Today I have rewarded them for their
patience: it is they who will succeed.’ 112 He will say, ‘How many
years were you on earth?’ 113 and they will reply, ‘We stayed a day or a
part of a day, but ask those who keep count.’ 114 He will say, ‘You
stayed but a little, if you had only known. 115 Did you think We had
created you in vain, and that you would not be brought back to Us?’
116 Exalted be God, the true King, there is no god but Him, the
Lord of the Glorious Throne! 117 Whoever prays to another god
alongside Him–– a god for whose existence he has no evidence–– will
face his reckoning with his Lord. Those who reject the truth will not
prosper. 118 Say [Prophet], ‘Lord, forgive and have mercy: You are
the most merciful of all.’

24. LIGHT
This Medinan sura clariﬁes several regulations for the Muslim community,
mainly to do with marriage, modesty, obedience to the Prophet, and appropriate behaviour in the household. The initial context is the false rumour against
 A  isha, the Prophet’s wife, who was left behind unwittingly by her travelling
companions after wandering away in search of a dropped necklace. She was
escorted back to Medina by a Muslim man coming later who found her there.
The sura is named after the Verse of Light (verses 35–6) where God’s light is
contrasted to the darkness in which the disbelievers ﬁnd themselves engulfed.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 This is a sura We have sent down and made obligatory: We have
sent down clear revelations in it, so that you may take heed. 2 Strike
the adulteress and the adulterer a one hundred times. b Do not let
compassion for them keep you from carrying out God’s law––if you
believe in God and the Last Day––and ensure that a group of
believers witnesses the punishment. 3 The adulterer is only [ﬁt] to
marry c an adulteress or an idolatress, and the adulteress is only [ﬁt]
to marry an adulterer or an idolater: such behaviour is forbidden to
believers. 4 As for those who accuse chaste women of fornication, and
then fail to provide four witnesses, strike them eighty times, and
reject their testimony ever afterwards: they are the lawbreakers,
5 except for those who repent later and make amends––God is most
forgiving and merciful.
6 As for those who accuse their own wives of adultery, but have no
other witnesses, let each one four times call God to witness that he is
telling the truth, 7 and, the ﬁfth time, call God to reject him if he is
lying; 8 punishment shall be averted from his wife if she in turn four
times calls God to witness that her husband is lying 9 and, the ﬁfth
time, calls God to reject her if he is telling the truth.
a The crime of zina in Arabic covers all extramarital sexual intercourse between a
man and a woman.
b Jalada in Arabic means ‘hit the skin’ with the hand or anything else. There are
reports that people used shoes, clothes, etc. (Bukhari, Hudud 4).
c This is not an injunction but a statement of fact, emphasizing the guilt of both.
There is another opinion that yankihu is used in its original sense of ‘copulate’. Whichever translation is used, this is not part of the punishment but a condemnation of the
crime.

24: 22

Light

221

10 If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, if it were
not that God accepts repentance and is wise . . .! a 11 It was a group
from among you that concocted the lie b ––do not consider it a bad
thing for you [people]; it was a good thing––and every one of them
will be charged with the sin he has earned. He who took the greatest
part in it will have a painful punishment. 12 When you heard the lie,
why did believing men and women not think well of their own
people and declare, ‘This is obviously a lie’? 13 And why did the
accusers not bring four witnesses to it? If they cannot produce such
witnesses, they are the liars in God’s eyes. 14 If it were not for God’s
bounty and mercy towards you in this world and the next, you would
already have been aﬄicted by terrible suﬀering for indulging in such
talk. 15 When you took it up with your tongues, and spoke with your
mouths things you did not know [to be true], you thought it was
trivial but to God it was very serious. 16 When you heard the lie, why
did you not say, ‘We should not repeat this–– God forbid!–– It is a
monstrous slander’? 17 God warns you never to do anything like this
again, if you are true believers. 18 God makes His messages clear to
you: God is all knowing, all wise. 19 A painful punishment waits in
this world and the next for those who like indecency to spread
among the believers: God knows and you do not. 20 If it were not for
God’s bounty and mercy and the fact that He is compassionate and
merciful . . .! 21 Believers, do not follow in Satan’s footsteps–– if you
do so, he will urge you to indecency and evil. If it were not for God’s
bounty and mercy towards you, not one of you would ever have
attained purity. God puriﬁes whoever He will: God is all hearing,
all seeing.
22 Those who have been graced with bounty and plenty should not
swear that they will [no longer] give to kinsmen, the poor, those
who emigrated in God’s way: c let them pardon and forgive. Do you
not wish that God should forgive you? God is most forgiving and
merciful.
a The statement ‘If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy’ is repeated four times
in this context, but the concluding clauses are suspended in verses 10 and 20. This
rhetorical suspense works in English and in Arabic. (See verses 14, 20, 21).
b This alludes to the accusation made against  A isha, the Prophet’s wife.
c Abu Bakr, father of  A isha, who used to support a relative called Mistah, swore,
when Mistah participated in spreading the rumour, that he would never support Mistah
again.

222

The Qur an

24: 23

23 Those who accuse honourable but unwary believing women are
rejected by God, in this life and the next. A painful punishment
awaits them 24 on the Day when their own tongues, hands, and feet
will testify against them about what they have done–– 25 on that Day,
God will pay them their just due in full–– and they will realize that
God is the Truth that makes everything clear. 26 Corrupt women are
for corrupt men, and corrupt men are for corrupt women; good
women are for good men and good men are for good women. The
good are innocent of what has been said against them; they will have
forgiveness and a generous provision.
27 Believers, do not enter other people’s houses until you have
asked permission to do so and greeted those inside–– that is best for
you: perhaps you will bear this in mind. 28 If you ﬁnd no one in, do
not enter unless you have been given permission to do so. If you are
told, ‘Go away’, then do so–– that is more proper for you. God knows
well what you do. 29 You will not be blamed for entering houses where
no one lives, and which could provide you with some useful service.
God knows everything you do openly and everything you conceal.
30 [Prophet], tell believing men to lower their glances and guard their
private parts: that is purer for them. God is well aware of everything
they do. 31 And tell believing women that they should lower their
glances, guard their private parts, and not display their charms
beyond what [it is acceptable] to reveal; a they should let their headscarves fall to cover their necklines and not reveal their charms
except to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands’ fathers, their
sons, their husbands’ sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their
sisters’ sons, their womenfolk, their slaves, such men as attend them
who have no sexual desire, or children who are not yet aware of
women’s nakedness; they should not stamp their feet so as to draw
attention to any hidden charms. Believers, all of you, turn to God so
that you may prosper.
32 Marry oﬀ b the single among you and those of your male and
female slaves who are ﬁt [for marriage]. c If they are poor, God will
a Literally ‘beyond what [ordinarily] shows’. This phrase is ambiguous in Arabic.
Recourse is commonly made to the hadith (prophetic tradition), which uses the same
verb dhahara in the sense of its being permissible for a woman to show only her face and
her hands in front of strangers.
b There is another reading that translates as ‘marry’.
c Or ‘righteous’.

24: 41

Light

223

provide for them from His bounty: God’s bounty is inﬁnite and He
is all knowing. 33 Those who are unable to marry should keep chaste
until God gives them enough out of His bounty. If any of your slaves
wish to pay for their freedom, make a contract with them accordingly, if you know they have good in them, and give them some of
the wealth God has given you. Do not force your slave-girls into
prostitution, when they themselves wish to remain honourable, in
your quest for the short-term gains of this world, although, if they
are forced, God will be forgiving and merciful to them.
34 We have sent verses down to you [people] clarifying the right
path, examples of those who passed away before you, and advice for
those who are mindful of God.
35 God is the Light of the heavens and earth. His Light is like this:
there is a niche, and in it a lamp, the lamp inside a glass, a glass like a
glittering star, fuelled from a blessed olive tree from neither east nor
west, whose oil almost gives light even when no ﬁre touches it––
light upon light–– God guides whoever He will to his Light; God
draws such comparisons for people; God has full knowledge of
everything–– 36 shining out in houses of worship. God has ordained
that they be raised high and that His name be remembered in them,
with men in them celebrating His glory morning and evening:
37 men who are not distracted, a either by commerce or proﬁt, from
remembering God, keeping up the prayer, and paying the prescribed alms, fearing a day when hearts and eyes will turn over.
38 God will reward such people according to the best of their actions,
and He will give them more of His bounty: God provides limitlessly
for anyone He will.
39 But the deeds of those who disbelieve are like a mirage in a
desert: the thirsty person thinks there will be water but, when he
gets there, he ﬁnds only God, who pays him his account in full––
God is swift in reckoning. 40 Or like shadows in a deep sea covered by
wave upon wave, with clouds above–– layer upon layer of darkness––
if he holds out his hand, he is scarcely able to see it. The one to
whom God gives no light has no light at all.
41 [Prophet], do you not see that all those who are in the heavens
and earth praise God, as do the birds with wings outstretched?
Each knows its [own way] of prayer and gloriﬁcation: God has full
a

Cf. 62: 11, which makes reference to worshippers who are distracted by trade.

224

The Qur an

24: 42

knowledge of what they do. 42 Control of the heavens and earth
belongs to God: and to God is the ﬁnal return. 43 Do you not see
that God drives the clouds, then gathers them together and piles
them up until you see rain pour from their midst? He sends hail
down from [such] mountains in the sky, pouring it on whoever He
wishes and diverting it from whoever He wishes–– the ﬂash of its
lightning almost snatches sight away. 44 God alternates night and
day–– there truly is a lesson in [all] this for those who have eyes to
see–– 45 and God created each animal out of [its own] ﬂuid: a some of
them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some on four.
God creates whatever He will; God has power over everything.
46 We have sent verses that clarify the right path: God guides
whoever He will to a straight path. 47 They say, ‘We believe in God
and the Messenger; we obey,’ but then some of them turn away:
these people are not true believers 48 and when they are summoned to
God and His Messenger in order for him to judge between them,
some of them turn away. 49 If they were claiming their right, they
would come willingly [to the Prophet]. 50 Do they have sickness in
their hearts? Are they full of doubts? Do they fear that God and His
Messenger might deal with them unjustly? No, it is they who are the
unjust ones. 51 When the true believers are summoned to God and
His Messenger in order for him to judge between them, they say, ‘We
hear and we obey.’ These are the ones who will prosper: 52 whoever
obeys God and His Messenger, stands in awe of God, and keeps his
duty to Him will be triumphant. 53 [The others] solemnly swear by
God that if you [Prophet] commanded them, they would march out.
Tell them, ‘Do not swear: it is reasonable obedience that is required,
and God is aware of everything you do.’ 54 Say, ‘Obey God; obey the
Messenger. If you turn away, [know that] he is responsible for the
duty placed upon him, and you are responsible for the duty placed
upon you. If you obey him, you will be rightly guided, but the
Messenger’s duty is only to deliver the message clearly.’
55 God has made a promise to those among you who believe and
do good deeds: He will make them successors to the land, as He did
those who came before them; He will empower the religion He has
chosen for them; He will grant them security to replace their fear.
a This ma is not ‘water’, which would have the generic al- (cf. 21: 30), but is for each
animal a special, essential ﬂuid, and so each creature is diﬀerent, as is clear from what
follows.

24: 62

Light

225

‘They will worship Me and not join anything with Me.’ Those who
are deﬁant after that will be the rebels.–– 56 [People], keep up the
prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and obey the Messenger, so that you
may be given mercy. 57 Do not think [Prophet] that the disbelievers
can escape God on earth; the Fire will be their ﬁnal home, an evil
end.
58 Believers, your slaves and any who have not yet reached puberty
should ask your permission to come in at three times of day: before
the dawn prayer; when you lay your garments aside in the midday
heat; and after the evening prayer. These are your three times for
privacy; at other times, there is no blame on you or them if you move
around each other freely. In this way God makes messages clear:
God is all knowing, all wise. 59 When your children reach puberty,
they should [always] ask your permission to enter, like their elders
do. This is how God makes His messages clear to you: God is all
knowing, all wise. 60 No blame will be attached to elderly women who
are not hoping for sex, if they take oﬀ their outer garments without
ﬂaunting their charms, but it is preferable for them not to do this:
God is all hearing, all seeing.
61 No blame will be attached to the blind, the lame, the sick. a
Whether you eat in your own houses, or those of your fathers,
your mothers, your brothers, your sisters, your paternal uncles,
your paternal aunts, your maternal uncles, your maternal aunts,
houses you have the keys for, or any of your friends’ houses, you will
not be blamed: you will not be blamed whether you eat in company
or separately. b When you enter any house, greet one another with a
greeting of blessing and goodness as enjoined by God. This is how
God makes His messages clear to you so that you may understand.
62 The true believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, who, when they are gathered with him on a communal matter, do not depart until they have asked his permission–– those who
ask your permission [Prophet] are the ones who truly believe in God
and His Messenger. When they ask your permission to attend to
their private aﬀairs, allow whoever you see ﬁt and ask God to forgive
a Commentators state that the blind etc. refrained from eating with the healthy, or
that the healthy refused to eat with them, and many link this statement to the following
one.
b Some commentators take this to be a qualiﬁcation of 4: 29, which was interpreted
by some Muslims as a prohibition on eating at each other’s houses without invitation.

226

The Qur an

24: 63

them. God is most forgiving and merciful. 63 [People], do not regard
the Messenger’s summons to you like one of you summoning
another–– God is well aware of those of you who steal away surreptitiously–– and those who go against his order should beware lest a trial
aﬄict them or they receive a painful punishment.
64 Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God: He knows
what state you are in–– on the Day when all are returned to Him, He
will tell them everything they have done–– God has full knowledge of
everything.

25. THE DIFFERENTIATOR
A Meccan sura that starts with a denunciation of polytheism, then deals with
the disbelievers’ arguments against the Prophet, the Qur an, and the Day of
Judgement. It warns them of their fate, citing examples of earlier peoples. The
sura describes the power and grace of God, and ends with the qualities of true
believers (verses 63–76).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Exalted a is He who has sent the Diﬀerentiator b down to His
servant so that it may be a warning to all people. 2 It is He who has
control over the heavens and earth and has no oﬀspring––no one
shares control with Him––and who created all things and made them
to an exact measure. 3 Yet the disbelievers take as their gods things
beneath Him that create nothing, and are themselves created, that
can neither harm nor help themselves, and have no control over
death, life, or resurrection.
4 The disbelievers say, ‘This can only be a lie he has forged with
the help of others’––they themselves have done great wrong and told
lies––5 and they say, ‘It is just ancient fables, which he has had
written down: they are dictated to him morning and evening.’ 6 Say,
‘It was sent down by Him who knows the secrets of the heavens and
earth. He is all forgiving, all merciful.’ 7 They also say, ‘What sort of
messenger is this? He eats food and walks about in the marketplaces!
Why has no angel been sent down to help him with his warnings?
8 Why has he not been given treasure or a garden to supply his food?’
and the evildoers say, ‘The man you follow is simply under a spell.’
9 See what they think you are like! They have gone astray and cannot
ﬁnd the right way. 10 Exalted is He who can, if He wishes, give you
better things than these: Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and
palaces too. 11 It is actually the coming of the Hour that they reject:

a This meaning of tabarak is supported by Razi and is more appropriate here than
‘blessed’.
b Al-furqan, another name for the Qur an. The word means ‘that which diﬀerentiates
right from wrong’.

228

The Qur an

25: 12

We have prepared a blazing ﬁre for those who reject the Hour.
12 When it sees them from a distance, they will hear it raging and
roaring, 13 and when they are hurled into a narrow part of it, chained
together, they will cry out for death. 14 ‘Do not cry out this day for
one death, but for many.’ 15 Say, ‘Which is better, this or the lasting
Garden that those who are mindful of God have been promised as
their reward and journey’s end?’ 16 There they will ﬁnd everything
they wish for, and there they will stay. [Prophet], this is a binding
promise from your Lord. 17 On the Day He gathers them all together
with those they worship beside Him, He will say, ‘Was it you [false
gods] who led these creatures of Mine astray, or did they stray from
the path by themselves?’ 18 They will say, ‘May You be exalted! We
ourselves would never take masters other than You! But You granted
them and their forefathers pleasures in this life, until they forgot
Your Reminder and were ruined.’ 19 [God will say], ‘Now your gods
have denounced what you say as lies: you cannot avoid the punishment; you will not get any help.’ If any of you commits such evil, We
shall make him taste agonizing torment.
20 No messenger have We sent before you [Muhammad] who did
not eat food and walk about in the marketplace. But We have made
some of you a means of testing others–– will you stand fast? Your
Lord is always watching. 21 Those who do not fear to meet Us say,
‘Why are the angels not sent down to us?’ or ‘Why can we not see our
Lord?’ They are too proud of themselves and too insolent. 22 There
will be no good news for the guilty on the Day they see the angels.
The angels will say, ‘You cannot cross the forbidden barrier,’ a 23 and
We shall turn to the deeds they have done and scatter them like dust.
24 But the companions in the Garden will have a better home on that
Day, and a fairer place to rest. 25 On the Day when the sky and its
clouds are split apart and the angels sent down in streams, 26 on that
Day, true authority belongs to the Lord of Mercy. It will be a grievous Day for the disbelievers. 27 On that Day the evildoer will bite his
own hand and say, ‘If only I had taken the same path as the Messenger. 28 Woe is me! If only I had not taken so and so as a friend–– 29 he
led me away from the Revelation after it reached me. Satan has
always betrayed mankind.’
30 The Messenger has said, ‘Lord, my people treat this Qur an
a

Cf. 23: 100.

25: 51

229

The Diﬀerentiator

as something to be shunned,’ 31 but We have always appointed adversaries from the wicked, for every prophet: Your Lord is suﬃcient
guide and helper. 32 The disbelievers also say, ‘Why was the Qur an
not sent down to him all at once?’ We sent it in this way to strengthen
your heart [Prophet]; We gave it to you in gradual revelation. 33 They
cannot put any argument to you without Our bringing you the truth
and the best explanation. 34 It is those driven [falling], on their faces, a
to Hell who will be in the worst place–– they are the furthest from
the right path.
35 We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron to
help him. 36 We said, ‘Go, both of you, to the people who have
rejected Our signs.’ Later We destroyed those people utterly. 37 The
people of Noah, too: when they rejected their messengers, We
drowned them and made them an example to all people. We have
prepared a painful torment for the evildoers, 38 as We did for the
people of  Ad, Thamud, and al-Rass, and many generations in
between. 39 To each of them We gave warnings, and each of them We
destroyed completely. 40 These disbelievers must have passed by the
town that was destroyed by the terrible rain b ––did they not see it?
Yet they do not expect to be raised from the dead. 41 Whenever they
see you [Prophet] they ridicule you: ‘Is this the one God has sent as a
messenger? 42 He might almost have led us astray from our gods if we
had not stood so ﬁrmly by them.’ When they see the punishment,
they will know who is furthest from the path. 43 Think [Prophet] of
the man who has taken his own passion as a god: are you to be his
guardian? 44 Do you think that most of them hear or understand?
They are just like cattle–– no, they are further from the path.
45 Do you not see how your Lord lengthens the shade? If He had
willed, He could have made it stand still–– We made the sun its indicator–– 46 but We gradually draw it towards Us, little by little. 47 It is
He who made the night a garment for you, and sleep a rest, and
made the day like a resurrection. 48 It is He who sends the winds as
heralds of good news before His Mercy. c We send down pure water
from the sky, 49 so that We can revive a dead land with it, and We give
it as a drink to many animals and people We have created. 50 Many
times We have repeated this to people so that they might take heed,
but most persist in their ingratitude. 51 If it had been Our will, We
a

Cf. 67: 22.

b

See 15: 74, 76.

c

The rain.

230

The Qur an

25: 52

would have sent a warner to every town, 52 so do not give in to the
disbelievers: strive hard against them with this Qur an.
53 It is He who released the two bodies of ﬂowing water, one sweet
and fresh and the other salty and bitter, and put an insurmountable
barrier between them. 54 It is He who creates human beings from
ﬂuid, then makes them kin by blood and marriage: your Lord is all
powerful! 55 Yet instead of God they worship things that can neither
beneﬁt nor harm them: the disbeliever has always turned his back on
his Lord. 56 We sent you only to give good news and warning. 57 Say,
‘I am not asking for any reward for it, but anyone who wishes should
take a path to his Lord.’ 58 Put your trust in the Living [God] who
never dies, and celebrate His praise. He knows the sins of His servants well enough: 59 it is He who created the heavens and earth and
what is between them in six Days, a and then established Himself on
the throne–– He is the Lord of Mercy; He is the Best Informed. b
60 Yet when they are told, ‘Bow down before the Lord of Mercy,’ they
say, ‘What is the Lord of Mercy? Should we bow down before anything you command?’ and they turn even further away. 61 Exalted
is He who put constellations in the heavens, a radiant light, and
an illuminating moon–– 62 it is He who made the night and day
follow each other–– so anyone who wishes may be mindful or show
gratitude.
63 The servants of the Lord of Mercy are those who walk humbly
on the earth, and who, when the foolish address them, reply, ‘Peace’;
64 those who spend the night bowed down or standing, worshipping
their Lord, 65 who plead, ‘Our Lord, turn away from us the suﬀering
of Hell, for it is a dreadful torment to suﬀer! 66 It is an evil home, a
foul resting place!’ 67 They are those who are neither wasteful nor
niggardly when they spend, but keep to a just balance; 68 those who
never invoke any other deity beside God, nor take a life, which God
has made sacred, except in the pursuit of justice, nor commit adultery. (Whoever does these things will face the penalties: 69 their torment will be doubled on the Day of Resurrection, and they will
remain in torment, disgraced, 70 except those who repent, believe,
Cf. 41: 9–12.
Other readings of this phrase include ‘ask someone who knows’ or ‘ask anyone
how well informed He is’, but the expression fas al, ‘ask someone’, at the beginning of
the phrase is a rhetorical device suggesting the truth of the statement and need not
be translated literally.
a
b

25: 77

The Diﬀerentiator

231

and do good deeds: God will change the evil deeds of such people
into good ones. He is most forgiving, most merciful. 71 People who
repent and do good deeds truly return to God.)
72[The servants of the Lord of Mercy are] those who do not give
false testimony, and who, when they see some frivolity, pass by with
dignity; 73 who, when reminded of their Lord’s signs, do not turn a
deaf ear and a blind eye to them; 74 those who pray, ‘Our Lord, give
us joy in our spouses and oﬀspring. Make us good examples to those
who are aware of You’. 75 These servants will be rewarded with the
highest place in Paradise for their steadfastness. There they will be
met with greetings and peace. 76 There they will stay–– a happy home
and resting place! 77 [Prophet, tell the disbelievers], ‘What are you to
my Lord without your supplication? But since you have written oﬀ
the truth as lies, the inevitable will happen.’ a
a

The punishment (cf. 4: 147).

26. THE POETS
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the reference to poets in verse 224. It
talks about the disbelievers who belittle the Qur an, and gives examples of
God’s power and grace in nature. It recounts several stories of earlier prophets,
the reactions of their people, and punishments that aﬄicted them, ending by
conﬁrming the divine origin of the Qur an. It is not something brought down
by the jinn, nor is it poetry.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ta Sin Mim
2 These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear:
3 [Prophet], are you going to worry yourself to death because they
will not believe? 4 If We had wished, We could have sent them down a
sign from heaven, at which their necks would stay bowed in utter
humility. 5 Whenever they are brought a new revelation from the
Lord of Mercy, they turn away: 6 they deny it, but the truth of what
they scorned will soon hit them. 7 Do they not see the earth, and
what noble kinds of thing We grow in it? 8 There truly is a sign in
this, though most of them do not believe: 9 your Lord alone is the
Almighty, the Merciful.
10 Your Lord called to Moses: ‘Go to those wrongdoers, 11 the
people of Pharaoh. Will they not take heed?’ 12 Moses said, ‘My
Lord, I fear they will call me a liar, 13 and I will feel stressed and
tongue-tied, so send Aaron too; 14 besides, they have a charge a
against me, and I fear they may kill me.’ 15 God said, ‘No [they will
not]. Go, both of you, with Our signs––We shall be with you, listening. 16 Go, both of you, to Pharaoh and say, “We bring a message
from the Lord of the Worlds: 17 let the Children of Israel leave
with us.” ’
18 Pharaoh said, ‘Did we not bring you up as a child among us?
Did you not stay with us for many years? 19 And then you committed
that crime of yours: you were so ungrateful.’ 20 Moses replied, ‘I was
a

Cf. 28: 15–20.

26: 50

The Poets

233

misguided when I did it 21 and I ﬂed from you in fear; later my Lord
gave me wisdom and made me one of His messengers. 22 And is
this–– that you have enslaved the Children of Israel–– the favour with
which you reproach me?’
23 Pharaoh asked, ‘What is this “Lord of the Worlds”?’ 24 Moses
replied, ‘He is the Lord of the heavens and earth and everything
between them. If you would only have faith!’ 25 Pharaoh said to those
present, ‘Do you hear what he says?’ 26 Moses said, ‘He is your Lord
and the Lord of your forefathers.’ 27 Pharaoh said, ‘This messenger
who has been sent to you is truly possessed.’ 28 Moses continued,
‘Lord of the East and West and everything between them. If you
would only use your reason!’ 29 But Pharaoh said [to him], ‘If you
take any god other than me, I will throw you into prison,’ 30 and
Moses asked, ‘Even if I show you something convincing?’ 31 ‘Show it
then,’ said Pharaoh, ‘if you are telling the truth.’ 32 So Moses threw
down his staﬀ and–– lo and behold!–– it became a snake for everyone
to see. 33 Then he drew out his hand and–– lo and behold!–– it was
white for the onlookers to see. 34 Pharaoh said to the counsellors
around him, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer! 35 He means to use his
sorcery to drive you out of your land! What do you suggest?’ 36 They
answered, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messengers to all the cities 37 to bring every accomplished sorcerer to you.’
38 The sorcerers were [to be] assembled at the appointed time on a
certain day 39 and the people were asked, 40 ‘Are you all coming? We
may follow the sorcerers if they win!’
41 When the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, ‘Shall we be
rewarded if we win?’ 42 and he said, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner
court.’ 43 Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever you will.’
44 They threw their ropes and staﬀs, saying, ‘By Pharaoh’s might, we
shall be victorious.’ 45 But Moses threw his staﬀ and–– lo and
behold!–– it swallowed up their trickery 46 and the sorcerers fell down
on their knees, 47 exclaiming, ‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,
48 the Lord of Moses and Aaron.’ 49 Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you
believe in him before I have given you permission? He must be the
master who taught you sorcery! Soon you will see: I will cut oﬀ your
alternate hands and feet a and then crucify the lot of you!’ 50 ‘That
will do us no harm,’ they said, ‘for we are sure to return to our
a

See note to 5: 33.

234

The Qur an

26: 51

Lord. 51 We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, as we were
the ﬁrst to believe.’
52 Then We revealed Our will to Moses, ‘Leave with My servants
by night, for you will be pursued!’ 53 Pharaoh sent messengers into
the cities, proclaiming, 54 ‘These people are a puny band––55 they
have enraged us–– 56 and we are a large army, on the alert.’ 57 So it was
that We made them leave their gardens and their springs, 58 their
treasures and their noble dwellings–– 59 We gave [such] things [later] a
to the Children of Israel. 60 Pharaoh and his people pursued them at
sunrise, 61 and as soon as the two sides came within sight of one
another, Moses’ followers said, ‘We shall deﬁnitely be caught.’
62 Moses said, ‘No, my Lord is with me: He will guide me,’ 63 and We
revealed to Moses: ‘Strike the sea with your staﬀ.’ It parted–– each
side like a mighty mountain–– 64 and We brought the others to that
place: 65 We saved Moses and all his companions, 66 and drowned the
rest. 67 There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not
believe: 68 your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
69 Tell them the story of Abraham, 70 when he asked his father and
his people, ‘What do you worship?’ 71 They said, ‘We worship idols,
and are constantly in attendance on them.’ 72 He asked, ‘Do they
hear you when you call? 73 Do they help or harm you?’ 74 They
replied, ‘No, but this is what we saw our fathers doing.’ 75 Abraham
said, ‘Those idols you have worshipped, 76 you and your forefathers,
77 are my enemies; not so the Lord of the Worlds, 78 who created me.
It is He who guides me; 79 He who gives me food and drink; 80 He
who cures me when I am ill; 81 He who will make me die and then
give me life again; 82 and He who will, I hope, forgive my faults on
the Day of Judgement. 83 My Lord, grant me wisdom; join me with
the righteous; 84 give me a good name among later generations;
85 make me one of those given the Garden of Bliss–– 86 forgive my
father, for he is one of those who have gone astray–– 87 and do not
disgrace me on the Day when all people are resurrected: 88 the Day
when neither wealth nor children can help, 89 when the only one who
will be saved is the one who comes before God with a heart devoted
to Him.’
90 When the Garden is brought near to the righteous 91 and the Fire
is placed in full view of the misguided, 92 it will be said to them,
a

Cf. 7: 137.

26: 136

The Poets

235

‘Where are those you worshipped 93 beside God? Can they help you
now, or even help themselves?’ 94 and then they will all be hurled into
Hell, together with those that misled them, 95 and all Iblis’s supporters. a 96 There they will say to their gods, as they bicker among
themselves, 97 ‘We were clearly misguided 98 when we made you equal
with the Lord of the Worlds. 99 It was the evildoers who led us astray,
100 and now we have no intercessor 101 and no true friend. 102 If only we
could live our lives again, we would be true believers!’ 103 There truly
is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 104 your Lord
alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
105 The people of Noah, too, called the messengers liars. 106 Their
brother Noah said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 107 I am
a faithful messenger sent to you: 108 be mindful of God and obey me.
109 I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the
Worlds: 110 be mindful of God and obey me.’ 111 They answered,
‘Why should we believe you when the worst sort of people follow
you?’ 112 He said, ‘What knowledge do I have of what they used to
do? 113 It is for my Lord alone to bring them to account–– if only you
could see–– 114 I will not drive believers away. 115 I am here only to give
people a clear warning.’ 116 So they said, ‘Noah, if you do not stop
this, you will be stoned.’ 117 He said, ‘My Lord, my people have
rejected me, 118 so make a ﬁrm judgement between me and them, and
save me and my believing followers.’ 119 So We saved him and his
followers in the fully laden ship, 120 and drowned the rest. 121 There
truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 122 your
Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
123 The people of  Ad, too, called the messengers liars. 124 Their
brother Hud said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 125 I am
a faithful messenger sent to you: 126 be mindful of God and obey me.
127 I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the
Worlds. 128 How can you be so vain that you set up monuments on
every high place? 129 Do you build fortresses because you hope to be
immortal? 130 Why do you act like tyrants whenever you attack someone? 131 Be mindful of God and obey me; 132 be mindful of Him who
has provided you with everything you know–– 133 He has given you
livestock, sons, 134 gardens, springs–– 135 for I truly fear that the torment of a grievous day will overtake you.’ 136 They replied, ‘It makes
a

See note to 37: 173.

236

The Qur an

26: 137

no diﬀerence to us whether you warn us or not, 137 for we only do
what our forefathers used to do: 138 we shall not be punished.’
139 They denounced him as a liar, and so We destroyed them. There
truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 140 your
Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
141 The people of Thamud, too, called the messengers liars.
142 Their brother Salih said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of
God? 143 I am a faithful messenger to you: 144 be mindful of God and
obey me. 145 I ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the
Lord of the Worlds. 146 [Do you think] you will be left secure for ever
in what you have here–– 147 gardens, springs, 148 ﬁelds, palm trees
laden with fruit–– 149 carving your ﬁne houses from the mountains?
150 Be mindful of God and obey me: 151 do not obey those who are
given to excess 152 and who spread corruption in the land instead of
doing what is right.’ 153 They said, ‘You are bewitched! 154 You are
nothing but a man like us. Show us a sign, if you are telling the
truth.’ 155 He said, ‘Here is a camel. She should have her turn to
drink and so should you, each on a speciﬁed day, 156 so do not harm
her, or the punishment of a terrible day will befall you.’ 157 But they
hamstrung her. In the morning they had cause to regret it: 158 the
punishment fell upon them. There truly is a sign in this, though
most of them will not believe: 159 your Lord alone is the Almighty, the
Merciful.
160 The people of Lot, too, called the messengers liars. 161 Their
brother Lot said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 162 I am a
faithful messenger to you: 163 be mindful of God and obey me. 164 I
ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the
Worlds. 165 Must you, unlike [other] people, lust after males 166 and
abandon the wives that God has created for you? You are exceeding
all bounds,’ 167 but they replied, ‘Lot! If you do not stop this, you will
be driven away.’ 168 So he said, ‘I loathe what you do: 169 Lord, save me
and my family from what they are doing.’ 170 We saved him and all his
family, 171 except for an old woman who stayed behind, 172 then We
destroyed the others, 173 and poured a rain of destruction down upon
them. How dreadful that rain was for those who had been forewarned! 174 There truly is a sign in this, though most of them will not
believe: 175 your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
176 The forest-dwellers, too, called the messengers liars. 177 Shu ayb
said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 178 I am a faithful

26: 215

The Poets

237

messenger to you: 179 be mindful of God and obey me. 180 I ask no
reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds.
181 Give full measure: do not sell others short. 182 Weigh with correct
scales: 183 do not deprive people of what is theirs. Do not spread
corruption on earth. 184 Be mindful of God who created you and
former generations,’ 185 but they replied, ‘You are bewitched! 186 You
are nothing but a man like us. In fact we think you are a liar. 187 Make
bits of the heavens fall down on us, if you are telling the truth.’ 188 He
said, ‘My Lord knows best what you do.’ 189 They called him a liar,
and so the torment of the Day of Shadow came upon them–– it was
the torment of a terrible day. 190 There truly is a sign in this, though
most of them will not believe: 191 your Lord alone is the Almighty, the
Merciful.
192 Truly, this Qur an has been sent down by the Lord of the
Worlds: 193 the Trustworthy Spirit a brought it down 194 to your heart
[Prophet], so that you could bring warning 195 in a clear Arabic
tongue. 196 This was foretold in the scriptures of earlier religions.
197 Is it not proof enough for them that the learned men of the
Children of Israel have recognized it? 198 If We had sent it down to
someone who was not an Arab, b 199 and he had recited it to them,
they still would not have believed in it. 200 So We make it pass straight
through the hearts of the guilty: 201 they will not believe in it until
they see the grievous torment, 202 which will suddenly hit them when
they are not expecting it, 203 and then they will say, ‘Can we have
more time?’ 204 How can they ask that Our punishment be brought to
them sooner? 205 Think, if we let them enjoy this life for some years
206 and then the promised torment came upon them, 207 what good
would their past enjoyment be to them? 208 Never have We destroyed
a town without sending down messengers to warn it, 209 as a reminder
from Us: We are never unjust.
210 It was not the jinn c who brought down this Qur an: 211 it is
neither in their interests nor in their power, 212 indeed they are prevented from overhearing it. 213 So [Prophet] do not invoke any gods
beside God, or you will incur punishment. 214 Warn your nearest
kinsfolk 215 and lower your wing tenderly over the believers who
a

Generally understood to mean the Angel Gabriel.
This alludes to the refusal of many Meccan Arabs to believe that revelation could
come to a man from among themselves.
c Cf. 72: 8–9; 37: 7–10.
b

238

The Qur an

26: 216

follow you. 216 If they disobey you, say, ‘I bear no responsibility for
your actions.’ 217 Put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful, 218 who
sees you when you stand up [for prayer] 219 and sees your movements
among the worshippers: 220 He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.
221 Shall I tell you who the jinn come down to? 222 They come down to
every lying sinner 223 who readily lends an ear to them, and most of
them are liars: 224 only those who are lost in error follow the poets. a
225 Do you not see how they rove aimlessly in every valley; 226 how
they say what they do not do? b 227 Not so those [poets] who believe, do
good deeds, remember God often, and defend themselves after
they have been wronged. The evildoers will ﬁnd out what they will
return to.
a The Meccans dismissed the Qur an as poetry. After the Prophet moved to Medina,
the Meccans commissioned poets to satirize the Muslims, and some Muslim poets
counter-attacked.
b Poets used to boast and exaggerate in their praise-poems and satires.

27. THE ANTS
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the ants mentioned in the Solomon
story (verses 18–19). It both opens and closes by describing the Qur an as joyful
news for the believers and a warning for others. It gives stories of past prophets
and the destruction of the communities that disbelieved in them. Illustrations
are given of the nature of God’s power, contrasted with the total lack of power
of the ‘partners’ they worship beside Him, and descriptions are given of the
Day of Judgement for those who deny it.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ta Sin
These are the verses of the Qur an––a scripture that makes things
clear; 2 a guide and joyful news for the believers 3 who keep up the
prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and believe ﬁrmly in the life to
come. 4 As for those who do not believe in the life to come, We have
made their deeds seem alluring to them, so they wander blindly: 5 it
is they who will have the worst suﬀering, and will be the ones to lose
most in the life to come. 6 You [Prophet] receive the Qur an from One
who is all wise, all knowing.
7 Moses said to his family, ‘I have seen a ﬁre. I will bring you news
from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’ 8 When he
reached the ﬁre, a voice called: ‘Blessed is the person near this ﬁre a
and those around it; b may God be exalted, the Lord of the Worlds.
9 Moses, I am God, the Mighty, the Wise. 10 Throw down your staﬀ,’
but when he saw it moving like a snake, he turned and ﬂed. ‘Moses,
do not be afraid! The messengers need have no fear in My presence,
11 I am truly most forgiving and merciful to those who do wrong, c
and then replace their evil with good. 12 Put your hand inside your
cloak and it will come out white, but unharmed. These are among

a Moses or God. Literally ‘in this ﬁre’ (ﬁ al-nari). Zamakhshari interprets ﬁ as ‘near’,
while Qatada and Zajjaj understand nar ‘ﬁre’ to mean nur ‘light’ (Razi).
b The angels.
c Cf. 28: 15. This is an allusion to a man Moses killed in Egypt.

240

The Qur an

27: 13

the nine signs that you will show Pharaoh and his people; they have
really gone too far.’
13 But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, ‘This
is clearly [just] sorcery!’ 14 They denied them, in their wickedness
and their pride, even though their souls acknowledged them as true.
See how those who spread corruption met their end!
15 We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said,
‘Praise be to God, who has favoured us over many of His believing
servants.’ 16 Solomon succeeded David. He said, ‘People, we have
been taught the speech of birds, and we have been given a share of
everything: this is a clearly a great favour.’ 17 Solomon’s hosts of jinn,
men, and birds were marshalled in ordered ranks before him, 18 and
when they came to the Valley of the Ants, one ant said, ‘Ants! Go
into your homes, in case Solomon and his hosts unwittingly crush
you.’ 19 Solomon smiled broadly at her words and said, ‘Lord, inspire
me to be thankful for the blessings You have granted me and my
parents, and to do good deeds that please You; admit me by Your
grace into the ranks of Your righteous servants.’
20 Solomon inspected the birds and said, ‘Why do I not see the
hoopoe? Is he absent? 21 I will punish him severely, or kill him, unless
he brings me a convincing excuse for his absence.’ 22 But the hoopoe
did not stay away long: he came and said, ‘I have learned something
you did not know: I come to you from Sheba with ﬁrm news. 23 I
found a woman ruling over the people, who has been given a share of
everything–– she has a magniﬁcent throne–– 24 [but] I found that she
and her people worshipped the sun instead of God. Satan has made
their deeds seem alluring to them, and diverted them from the right
path: they cannot ﬁnd the right path. 25 Should they not worship
God, who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and earth and
knows both what you people conceal and what you declare? 26 He is
God, there is no god but Him, the Lord of the mighty throne.’
27 Solomon said, ‘We shall see whether you are telling the truth or
lying. 28 Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then withdraw and see what answer they send back.’
29 The Queen of Sheba said, ‘Counsellors, a gracious letter has
been delivered to me. 30 It is from Solomon, and it says, “In the name
of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy, 31 do not put yourselves above me, and come to me in submission to God.”’ 32 She
said, ‘Counsellors, give me your counsel in the matter I now face: I

27: 48

The Ants

241

only ever decide on matters in your presence.’ 33 They replied, ‘We
possess great force and power in war, but you are in command, so
consider what orders to give us.’ 34 She said, ‘Whenever kings go into
a city, they ruin it and humiliate its leaders–– that is what they do––
35 but I am going to send them a gift, then see what answer my envoys
bring back.’
36 When her envoy came to Solomon, Solomon said, ‘What! Are
you oﬀering me wealth? What God has given me is better than what
He has given you, though you rejoice in this gift of yours. 37 Go back
to your people: we shall certainly come upon them with irresistible
forces, and drive them, disgraced and humbled, from their land.’
38 Then he said, ‘Counsellors, which of you can bring me her throne
before they come to me in submission?’ 39 A powerful and crafty jinn
replied, ‘I will bring it to you before you can even rise from your
place. I am strong and trustworthy enough,’ 40 but one of them who
had some knowledge of the Scripture said, ‘I will bring it to you in
the twinkling of an eye.’
When Solomon saw it set before him, he said, ‘This is a favour
from my Lord, to test whether I am grateful or not: if anyone is
grateful, it is for his own good, if anyone is ungrateful, then my Lord
is self-suﬃcient and most generous.’ 41 Then he said, ‘Disguise her
throne, and we shall see whether or not she recognizes it.’ 42 When
she arrived, she was asked, ‘Is this your throne?’ She replied, ‘It
looks like it.’ [Solomon said], ‘We were given knowledge before her,
and we devoted ourselves to God; 43 she was prevented by what she
worshipped instead of God, for she came from a disbelieving
people.’ 44 Then it was said to her, ‘Enter the hall,’ but when she saw
it, she thought it was a deep pool of water, and bared her legs.
Solomon explained, ‘It is just a hall paved with glass,’ and she said,
‘My Lord, I have wronged myself: I devote myself, with Solomon, to
God, the Lord of the Worlds.’
45 To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih, saying,
‘Worship God alone,’ but they split into two rival factions. 46 Salih
said, ‘My people, why do you rush to bring [forward] what is bad
rather than good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of God, so that
you may be given mercy?’ 47 They said, ‘We see you and your followers as an evil omen.’ He replied, ‘God will decide on any omen
you may see: you people are being put to the test.’ 48 There were nine
men in the city who spread corruption in the land without making

242

The Qur an

27: 49

amends. 49 They said, ‘Swear by God: we shall attack this man and
his household in the night, then say to his next of kin, “We did not
witness the destruction of his household. We are telling the truth.”’
50 So they devised their evil plan, but We too made a plan of which
they were unaware. 51 See how their scheming ended: We destroyed
them utterly, along with all their people. 52 As a result of their evil
deeds, their homes are desolate ruins–– there truly is a sign in this for
those who know–– 53 but We saved those who believed and were
mindful of God.
54 We also sent Lot to his people. He said to them, ‘How can you
commit this outrage with your eyes wide open? 55 How can you lust
after men instead of women? What fools you are!’ 56 The only answer
his people gave was to say, ‘Expel Lot’s followers from your town!
These men mean to stay chaste!’ 57 We saved him and his family––
except for his wife: We made her stay behind–– 58 and We brought
rain down on them. How dreadful that rain was for those who had
been warned!
59 Say [Prophet], ‘Praise be to God and peace on the servants He
has chosen. a Who is better: God, or those they set up as partners
with Him? 60 Who created the heavens and earth? Who sends down
water from the sky for you–– with which We cause gardens of delight
to grow: you have no power to make the trees grow in them–– is it
another god beside God? No! But they are people who take others to
be equal with God. 61 Who is it that made the earth a stable place to
live? Who made rivers ﬂow through it? Who set immovable mountains on it and created a barrier between the fresh and salt water? Is it
another god beside God? No! But most of them do not know. 62 Who
is it that answers the distressed when they call upon Him? Who
removes their suﬀering? Who makes you successors in the earth? Is
it another god beside God? Little notice you take! 63 Who is it that
guides you through the darkness on land and sea? Who sends the
winds as heralds of good news before His mercy? b Is it another god
beside God? God is far above the partners they put beside him!
64 Who is it that creates life and reproduces it? Who is it that gives
you provision from the heavens and earth? Is it another god beside
God?’ Say, ‘Show me your evidence then, if what you say is true.’
a
b

As messengers, see e.g. 3: 33.
i.e. rain.

27: 88

The Ants

243

65 Say, ‘No one in the heavens or on earth knows the unseen except
God.’ They do not know when they will be raised from the dead:
66 their knowledge cannot comprehend the Hereafter; they are in
doubt about it; they are blind to it. 67 So the disbelievers say, ‘What!
When we and our forefathers have become dust, shall we be brought
back to life again? 68 We have heard such promises before, and so did
our forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’ 69 [Prophet], say,
‘Travel through the earth and see how the evildoers ended up.’
70 [Prophet], do not grieve over them; do not be distressed by their
schemes. 71 They also say, ‘When will this promise be fulﬁlled if what
you say is true?’ 72 Say, ‘Maybe some of what you seek to hasten is
near at hand.’ 73 Your Lord is bountiful to people, though most of
them are ungrateful. 74 He knows everything their hearts conceal and
everything they reveal: 75 there is nothing hidden in the heavens or on
earth that is not in a clear Record.
76 Truly, this Qur an explains to the Children of Israel most of
what they diﬀer about, 77 and it is guidance and grace for those who
believe. 78 Truly, your Lord will judge between them in His wisdom–– He is the Almighty, the All Knowing–– 79 so [Prophet], put
your trust in God, you are on the path of clear truth. 80 You cannot
make the dead hear, you cannot make the deaf listen to your call
when they turn their backs and leave, 81 you cannot guide the blind
out of their error: you cannot make anyone hear you except those
who believe in Our signs and submit [to Us]. 82 When the verdict is
given against them, We shall bring a creature out of the earth, which
will tell them that people had no faith in Our revelations. 83 The Day
will come when We gather from every community a crowd of those
who disbelieved in Our signs and they will be led in separate groups
84 until, when they come before Him, He will say, ‘Did you deny
My messages without even taking them in? Or what were you
doing?’ 85 The verdict will be given against them because of their
wrongdoing: they will not speak.
86 Did they not see that We gave them the night for rest, and the
day for light? There truly are signs in this for those who believe.
87 On the Day the Trumpet sounds, everyone in heaven and on earth
will be terriﬁed–– except such as God wills–– and all will come to
Him in utter humility. 88 You will see the mountains and think they
are ﬁrmly ﬁxed, but they will ﬂoat away like clouds: this is the
handiwork of God who has perfected all things. He is fully aware of

244

The Qur an

27: 89

what you do: 89 whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded
with something better, and be secure from the terrors of that Day,
90 but whoever comes with evil deeds will be cast face downwards
into the Fire. ‘Are you rewarded for anything except what you have
done?’ 91 [Say Prophet], ‘What I am commanded to do is to serve the
Sustainer of this town, a which He has made inviolable. Everything
belongs to Him; I am commanded to be one of those devoted to
Him; 92 I am commanded to recite the Qur an.’ Whoever chooses to
follow the right path does so for his own good. Say to whoever
deviates from it, ‘I am only here to warn.’ 93 Say, ‘Praise belongs to
God: He will show you His signs so that you will recognize them.’
Your Lord is never unmindful of what you all do.
a

Mecca.

28. THE STORY
A Meccan sura which centres on the story of Moses and takes its title from the
reference to the story told by Moses in verse 25. Its main theme is the bad end that
comes to those who are arrogant and spread corruption, like Pharaoh and
Qarun––polytheism is denounced at various points throughout the sura––and a
link is made between these and the disbelievers of Mecca. The Prophet is
reminded that he cannot make everyone believe (verse 56) and should remain
steadfast (verse 87).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ta Sin Mim
2 These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear: 3 We
recount to you [Prophet] part of the story of Moses and Pharaoh,
setting out the truth for people who believe. 4 Pharaoh made himself
high and mighty in the land and divided the people into diﬀerent
groups: one group he oppressed, slaughtering their sons and sparing
their women––he was one of those who spread corruption––5 but We
wished to favour those who were oppressed in that land, to make
them leaders, the ones to survive, 6 to establish them in the land, and
through them show Pharaoh, Haman, and their armies the very
thing they feared.
7 We inspired Moses’ mother, saying, ‘Suckle him, and then, when
you fear for his safety, put him in the river: do not be afraid, and do
not grieve, for We shall return him to you and make him a messenger.’ 8 Pharaoh’s household picked him up––later to a become an
enemy and a source of grief for them: Pharaoh, Haman, and their
armies were wrongdoers––9 and Pharaoh’s wife said, ‘Here is a joy to
behold for me and for you! Do not kill him: he may be of use to us, or
we may adopt him as a son.’ They did not realize what they were
doing. 10 The next day, Moses’ mother felt a void in her heart––if We
had not strengthened it to make her one of those who believe, she
would have revealed everything about him––11 and she said to his
sister, ‘Follow him.’ So she watched him from a distance, without
a

Li here indicates consequence rather than purpose.

246

The Qur an

28: 12

them knowing. 12 We had ordained that he would refuse to feed from
wet nurses. His sister approached them and said, ‘Shall I tell you
about a household which could bring him up for you and take good
care of him?’ 13 We restored him to his mother in this way, so that she
might be comforted, not grieve, and know that God’s promise is
true, though most of them do not know.
14 When Moses reached full maturity and manhood, We gave him
wisdom and knowledge: this is how We reward those who do good.
15 He entered the city, unnoticed by its people, and found two men
ﬁghting: one from his own people, the other an enemy. The one
from his own people cried out to him for help against the enemy.
Moses struck him with his ﬁst and killed him. He said, ‘This must be
Satan’s work: clearly he is a misleading enemy.’ 16 He said, ‘Lord, I
have wronged myself. Forgive me,’ so He forgave him; He is truly
the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 17 He said, ‘My Lord,
because of the blessings You have bestowed upon me, I shall never
support those who do evil.’
18 Next morning, he was walking in the city, fearful and vigilant,
when suddenly the man he had helped the day before cried out to
him for help. Moses said, ‘You are clearly a troublemaker.’ 19 As he
was about to attack the man who was an enemy to both of them, the
man said, ‘Moses, are you going to kill me as you killed that person
yesterday? You clearly want to be a tyrant in the land; you do not
intend to put things right.’ 20 Then a man came running from the
furthest part of the city and said, ‘Moses, the authorities are talking
about killing you, so leave–– this is my sincere advice.’ 21 So Moses
left the city, fearful and wary, and prayed, ‘My Lord, save me from
people who do wrong.’
22 As he made his way towards Midian, he was saying, ‘May my
Lord guide me to the right way.’ 23 When he arrived at Midian’s
waters, he found a group of men watering [their ﬂocks], and beside
them two women keeping their ﬂocks back, so he said, ‘What is the
matter with you two?’ They said, ‘We cannot water [our ﬂocks] until
the shepherds take their sheep away: our father is a very old man.’
24 He watered their ﬂocks for them, withdrew into the shade, and
prayed, ‘My Lord, I am in dire need of whatever good thing You
may send me,’ 25 and then one of the two women approached him,
walking shyly, and said, ‘My father is asking for you: he wants to
reward you for watering our ﬂocks for us.’

28: 39

The Story

247

When Moses came to him and told him his story, the old man said,
‘Do not be afraid, you are safe now from people who do wrong.’
26 One of the women said, ‘Father, hire him: a strong, trustworthy
man is the best to hire.’ 27 The father said, ‘I would like to marry you
to one of these daughters of mine, on condition that you serve me for
eight years: if you complete ten, it will be of your own free will. I do
not intend to make things diﬃcult for you: God willing, you will ﬁnd
I am a fair man.’ 28 Moses said, ‘Let that be the agreement between
us–– whichever of the two terms I fulﬁl, let there be no injustice to
me–– God is witness to what we say.’
29 Once Moses had fulﬁlled the term and was travelling with his
family, he caught sight of a ﬁre on the side of the mountain and
said to his family, ‘Wait! I have seen a ﬁre. I will bring you news
from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’ 30 But
when he reached it, a voice called out to him from the right-hand
side of the valley, from a tree on the blessed ground: ‘Moses, I am
God, the Lord of the Worlds. 31 Throw down your staﬀ.’ When he
saw his staﬀ moving like a snake, he ﬂed in fear and would not
return. Again [he was called]: ‘Moses! Draw near! Do not be
afraid, for you are one of those who are safe. 32 Put your hand
inside your shirt and it will come out white but unharmed–– hold
your arm close to your side, free from all fear. These shall be two
signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs; they are truly
wicked people.’ 33 Moses said, ‘My Lord, I killed one of their men,
and I fear that they may kill me. 34 My brother Aaron is more
eloquent than I: send him with me to help me and conﬁrm my
words–– I fear they may call me a liar.’ 35 God said, ‘We shall
strengthen you through your brother; We shall give you both power
so that they cannot touch you. With Our signs you, and those who
follow you, will triumph.’
36 But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said,
‘These are mere conjuring tricks; we never heard this from our
forefathers.’ 37 Moses said, ‘My Lord knows best who comes with
guidance from Him and who will have the ﬁnal Home: wrongdoers
will never succeed.’ 38 Pharaoh said, ‘Counsellors, you have no other
god that I know of except me. Haman, light me a ﬁre to bake clay
bricks, then build me a tall building so that I may climb up to
Moses’ God: I am convinced that he is lying.’
39 Pharaoh and his armies behaved arrogantly in the land with no

248

The Qur an

28: 40

right–– they thought they would not be brought back to Us–– 40 so We
seized him and his armies and threw them into the sea. See what
became of the wrongdoers! 41 We made them leaders calling [others]
only to the Fire: on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped.
42 We made Our rejection pursue them in this world, and on the Day
of Resurrection they will be among the despised. 43 After We had
destroyed the earlier generations, We gave Moses the Scripture to
provide insight, guidance, and mercy for people, so that they might
take heed.
44 You [Muhammad] were not present on the western side of the
mountain when We gave Our command to Moses: you were not
there–– 45 We have brought into being many generations who lived
long lives–– you did not live among the people of Midian or recite
Our Revelation to them–– We have always sent messengers to
people–– 46 nor were you present on the side of Mount Sinai when
We called out to Moses. But you too have been sent as an act of grace
from your Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner has
come before, so that they may take heed, 47 and may not say, if a
disaster should befall them as a result of what they have done with
their own hands, ‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we
might have followed Your message and become believers.’ 48 Even
now that Our truth has come to them, they say, ‘Why has he not been
given signs like those given to Moses?’ Did they not also deny the
truth that was given to Moses before? They say, ‘Two kinds of sorcery, helping each other,’ and, ‘We refuse to accept either of them.’
49 Say [Muhammad], ‘Then produce a book from God that gives
better guidance than these two and I will follow it, if you are telling
the truth.’ 50 If they do not respond to you, you will know that they
follow only their own desires. Who is further astray than the one
who follows his own desires with no guidance from God? Truly God
does not guide those who do wrong.
51 We have caused Our Word to come to them so that they may be
mindful. 52 Those to whom We gave the Scripture before believe in
it, a 53 and, when it is recited to them, say, ‘We believe in it, it is the
truth from our Lord. Before it came we had already devoted ourselves to Him.’ 54 They will be given their rewards twice over because
they are steadfast, repel evil with good, give to others out of what
a

The Qur an.

28: 69

The Story

249

We have provided for them, 55 and turn away whenever they hear
frivolous talk, saying, ‘We have our deeds and you have yours. Peace
be with you! We do not seek the company of ignorant people.’
56 You [Prophet] cannot guide everyone you love to the truth; it is
God who guides whoever He will: He knows best those who will
follow guidance. 57 They say, ‘If we were to follow guidance with you
[Prophet], we would be swept from our land.’ Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary a where every kind of produce is
brought, as a provision from Us? But most of them do not comprehend. 58 We have destroyed many a community that once revelled in
its wanton wealth and easy living: since then their dwelling places
have barely been inhabited–– We are the only heir. 59 Your Lord
would never destroy towns without ﬁrst raising a messenger in their
midst to recite Our messages to them, nor would We destroy towns
unless their inhabitants were evildoers. 60 Whatever things you
have been given for the life of this world are merely [temporary]
gratiﬁcation and vanity: that which is with God is better and more
lasting–– will you not use your reason?
61 Can the person who will see the fulﬁlment of the good promise
We gave him be compared to someone We have given some enjoyments for this worldly life but who, on the Day of Resurrection, will
be summoned? b 62 The Day will come when God will call them,
saying, ‘Where now are those you allege are My partners?’ 63 and
those [ringleaders] against whom the verdict will be passed will say,
‘Our Lord, these are the ones we caused to deviate. We caused them
to deviate as we ourselves deviated, but now we disown them before
You: they did not really serve us.’ 64 It will then be said to them,
‘Now call those you worshipped as partners,’ and they will call them
but receive no answer. They will see the suﬀering and wish they had
followed guidance. 65 On that Day He will call them, saying, ‘How
did you respond to My messengers?’ 66 All arguments will seem
obscure to them on that Day; they will not be able to consult one
another. 67 Yet anyone who has repented, believed, and done good
deeds can hope to ﬁnd himself among the successful. 68 Your Lord
creates what He pleases and chooses those He will–– they have no
choice–– so glory be to God, and may He be exalted above the
partners they ascribe to Him! 69 Your Lord knows what their hearts
a

Mecca.

b

For punishment.

250

The Qur an

28: 70

conceal and what they reveal. 70 He is God; there is no god but Him;
all praise belongs to Him in this world and the next; His is the
Judgement; and to Him you shall be returned.
71 Say [Prophet], ‘Just think, if God were to cast perpetual night
over you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than He
could bring you light? Do you not listen?’ 72 Say, ‘Just think, if God
were to cast perpetual day over you until the Day of Resurrection,
what god other than He could give you night in which to rest? Do
you not see? 73 In His mercy He has given you night and day, so that
you may rest and seek His bounty and be grateful.’ 74 The Day will
come when He will call out to them, saying, ‘Where are the partners
you claimed for Me?’ 75 We shall call a witness from every community, and say, ‘Produce your evidence,’ and then they will know
that truth belongs to God alone; the gods they invented will forsake
them.
76 Qarun was one of Moses’ people, but he oppressed them. We
had given him such treasures that even their keys would have
weighed down a whole company of strong men. His people said to
him, ‘Do not gloat, for God does not like people who gloat. 77 Seek
the life to come by means of what God has granted you, but do not
neglect your rightful share in this world. Do good to others as God
has done good to you. Do not seek to spread corruption in the land,
for God does not love those who do this,’ 78 but he answered, ‘This
wealth was given to me on account of the knowledge I possess.’ Did
he not know that God had destroyed many generations before him,
who had greater power than him and built up greater wealth? The
guilty will not be questioned about their sins. a 79 He went out
among his people in all his pomp, and those whose aim was the life of
this world said, ‘If only we had been given something like what
Qarun has been given: he really is a very fortunate man,’ 80 but those
who were given knowledge said, ‘Alas for you! God’s reward is better
for those who believe and do good deeds: only those who are steadfast will attain this.’ 81 We caused the earth to swallow him and his
home: he had no one to help him against God, nor could he defend
himself. 82 The next day, those who had, the day before, wished to be
a There are a number of interpretations of this verse, the most likely, according to
Razi, being that the guilty will not be granted the privilege of being questioned about
their sins, nor will they be given the opportunity to provide excuses.

28: 88

The Story

251

in his place exclaimed, ‘Alas [for you, Qarun]! It is God alone who
gives what He will, abundantly or sparingly, to whichever He will of
His creatures: if God had not been gracious to us, He would have
caused the earth to swallow us too.’ Alas indeed! Those who deny the
truth will never prosper.
83 We grant the Home in the Hereafter to those who do not seek
superiority on earth or spread corruption: the happy ending is
awarded to those who are mindful of God. 84 Whoever comes before
God with a good deed will receive a better reward; whoever comes
with an evil deed will be punished only for what he has done. 85 He
who has made the Qur an binding on you [Prophet] will bring you
back home. a So say, ‘My Lord knows best who has brought true
guidance and who is blatantly astray.’ 86 You yourself could not have
expected the Scripture to be sent to you; it came only as a mercy
from your Lord. So give no help to the disbelievers. 87 Do not let
them turn you away from God’s revelations after they have been
revealed to you. Call people to your Lord. Never become one of
those who ascribe partners to God. 88 Do not call out to any other god
beside God, for there is no god but Him. Everything will perish
except His Face. His is the Judgement and to Him you shall all be
brought back.
a To Him. Cf. verse 83. Various commentators take this to refer to Mecca or to the life
to come.

29. THE SPIDER
A Meccan sura that takes its title from the illustration of the spider in
verse 41. The sura stresses that believers will be tested and that they should
remain steadfast. The misconceptions of disbelievers regarding the nature of
revelation and the Prophet are addressed. References are made to earlier
prophets and details given of the punishments brought on those who denied
them.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim
2 Do people think they will be left alone after saying ‘We believe’
without being put to the test? 3 We tested those who went before
them: God will certainly mark out which ones are truthful and
which are lying. 4 Do the evildoers think they can escape us? How
ill they judge! 5 But as for those who strive for their meeting with
God, God’s appointed time is bound to come; He is the All Seeing,
the All Knowing. 6 Those who exert themselves do so for their own
beneﬁt––God does not need His creatures––7 We shall certainly blot
out the misdeeds of those who believe and do good deeds, and We
shall reward them according to the best of their actions. 8 We have
commanded people to be good to their parents, but do not obey them
if they strive to make you serve, beside Me, anything of which you
have no knowledge: you will all return to Me, and I shall inform you
of what you have done. 9 We shall be sure to admit those who believe
and do good deeds to the ranks of the righteous.
10 There are some people who say, ‘We believe in God,’ but, when
they suﬀer for His cause, they think that human persecution is as
severe as God’s punishment––yet, if any help comes to you
[Prophet] from your Lord, they will say, ‘We have always been with
you’. Does God not know best what is in everyone’s hearts? 11 God
will be sure to mark out which ones are the believers, and which the
hypocrites. 12 Those who disbelieve say to the believers, ‘Follow our
path and we shall bear [the consequences for] your sins,’ yet they will
not do so––they are liars. 13 They will bear their own burdens and

29: 29

The Spider

253

others besides: they will be questioned about their false assertions on
the Day of Resurrection.
14 We sent Noah out to his people. He lived among them for ﬁfty
years short of a thousand but when the Flood overwhelmed them
they were still doing evil. 15 We saved him and those with him on the
Ark. We made this a sign for all people.
16 We also sent Abraham. He said to his people, ‘Serve God and be
mindful of Him: that is better for you, if only you knew. 17 What you
worship instead of God are mere idols; what you invent is nothing
but falsehood. Those you serve instead of God have no power to give
you provisions, so seek provisions from God, serve Him, and give
Him thanks: you will all be returned to Him. 18 If you say this is a lie,
[be warned that] other communities before you said the same. The
messenger’s only duty is to give clear warning.’
19 Do they not see that God brings life into being and reproduces
it? Truly this is easy for God. 20 Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth
and see how He brings life into being: and He will bring the next life
into being. God has power over all things. 21 He punishes whoever
He will and shows mercy to whoever He will. You will all be
returned to Him. 22 You cannot escape Him on earth or in the
heavens; you will have no one to protect or help you besides God.’
23 Those who deny God’s Revelation and their meeting with Him
have no hope of receiving My grace: they will have a grievous
torment.
24 The only answer Abraham’s people gave was, ‘Kill him or burn
him!’ but God saved him from the Fire: there truly are signs in this
for people who believe. 25 Abraham said to them, ‘You have chosen
idols instead of God but your love for them will only last for the
present life: on the Day of Resurrection, you will disown and reject
one another. Hell will be your home and no one will help you.’ 26 Lot
believed him, and said, ‘I will ﬂee to my Lord: He is the Almighty,
the All Wise.’ 27 We gave Isaac and Jacob to Abraham, and placed
prophethood and Scripture among his oﬀspring. We gave him his
rewards in this world, and in the life to come he will be among the
righteous.
28 And Lot: when He said to his people, ‘You practise outrageous
acts that no people before you have ever committed. 29 How can you
lust after men, waylay travellers, and commit evil in your gatherings?’ the only answer his people gave was, ‘Bring God’s punishment

254

The Qur an

29: 30

down on us, if what you say is true.’ 30 So he prayed, ‘My Lord, help
me against these people who spread corruption.’ 31 When Our messengers brought the good news [of the birth of a son] to Abraham, a
they told him, ‘We are about to destroy the people of that town.
They are wrongdoers.’ 32 Abraham said, ‘But Lot lives there.’ They
answered, ‘We know who lives there better than you do. We shall save
him and his household, except for his wife: she will be one of those
who stay behind.’ 33 When Our messengers came to Lot, he was
troubled and distressed on their account. They said, ‘Have no fear or
grief: we shall certainly save you and your household, except for your
wife–– she will be one of those who stay behind–– 34 and we shall send
a punishment from heaven down on the people of this town because
they violate [God’s order].’ 35 We left some [of the town] there as a
clear sign for those who use their reason.
36 To the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu ayb. He said,
‘My people, serve God and think ahead to the Last Day. Do not
commit evil and spread corruption in the land.’ 37 They rejected him
and so the earthquake overtook them. When morning came, they
were lying dead in their homes. 38 [Remember] the tribes of  Ad and
Thamud: their history is made clear to you by [what is left of] their
dwelling places. Satan made their foul deeds seem alluring to them
and barred them from the right way, though they were capable of
seeing. 39 [Remember] Qarun and Pharaoh and Haman: Moses
brought them clear signs, but they behaved arrogantly on earth.
They could not escape Us 40 and We punished each one of them for
their sins: some We struck with a violent storm; some were overcome
by a sudden blast; some We made the earth swallow; and some We
drowned. It was not God who wronged them; they wronged themselves. 41 Those who take protectors other than God can be compared to spiders building themselves houses–– the spider’s is the
frailest of all houses–– if only they could understand. 42 God knows
what things they call upon beside Him: He is the Mighty, the Wise.
43 Such are the comparisons We draw for people, though only the
wise can grasp them. 44 God has created the heavens and earth for a
true purpose. There truly is a sign in this for those who believe.
45 [Prophet], recite what has been revealed to you of the Scripture;
keep up the prayer: prayer restrains outrageous and unacceptable
a

Cf. e.g. 51: 28.

29: 60

The Spider

255

behaviour. Remembering God is greater: God knows everything you
are doing. 46 [Believers], argue only in the best way with the People of
the Book, except with those of them who act unjustly. Say, ‘We
believe in what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you;
our God and your God are one [and the same]; we are devoted to
Him.’ 47 This is the way We sent the Scripture to you [Muhammad].
Those to whom We had already given Scripture a believe in [the
Qur an] and so do some of these people. No one refuses to
acknowledge Our revelations but the deﬁant.
48 You never recited any Scripture before We revealed this one to
you; you never wrote one down with your hand. If you had done so,
those who follow falsehood might have had cause to doubt. 49 But no,
[this Qur an] is a revelation that is clear to the hearts of those
endowed with knowledge. No one refuses to acknowledge Our revelations but the evildoers. 50 They say, ‘Why have no miracles been
sent to him by his Lord?’ Say, ‘Miracles lie in God’s hands; I am
simply here to warn you plainly.’ 51 Do they not think it is enough
that We have sent down to you the Scripture that is recited to them?
There is a mercy in this and a lesson for believing people. 52 Say,
‘God is suﬃcient witness between me and you: He knows what is in
the heavens and earth. Those who believe in false deities and deny
God will be the losers.’
53 They challenge you to hasten the punishment: they would
already have received a punishment if God had not set a time for it,
and indeed it will come to them suddenly and catch them unawares.
54 They challenge you to hasten the punishment: Hell will encompass
all those who deny the truth, 55 on the Day when punishment overwhelms them from above and from below their very feet, and they
will be told, ‘Now taste the punishment for what you used to do.’
56 My believing servants! My earth is vast, so worship Me and Me
alone. 57 Every soul will taste death, then it is to Us that you will be
returned. 58 We shall lodge those who believed and did good deeds
in lofty dwellings, in the Garden graced with ﬂowing streams, there
to remain. How excellent is the reward of those who labour,
59 those who are steadfast, those who put their trust in their Lord!
60 How many are the creatures who do not store their sustenance!
a According to some commentators this refers to those Jews and Christians at the
time of the Prophet who believed in him.

256

The Qur an

29: 61

God sustains them and you: He alone is the All Hearing, the All
Knowing. 61 If you ask the disbelievers who created the heavens and
earth and who harnessed the sun and moon, they are sure to say,
‘God.’ Then why do they turn away from Him? 62 It is God who
gives abundantly to whichever of His servants He will, and sparingly
to whichever He will: He has full knowledge of everything. 63 If you
ask them, ‘Who sends water down from the sky and gives life with it
to the earth after it has died?’ they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praise
belongs to God!’ Truly, most of them do not use their reason.
64 The life of this world is merely an amusement and a diversion;
the true life is in the Hereafter, if only they knew. 65 Whenever they
go on board a ship they call on God, and dedicate their faith to Him
alone, but once He has delivered them safely back to land, see how
they ascribe partners to Him! 66 Let them show their ingratitude for
what We have given them; let them take their enjoyment–– soon they
will know. 67 Can they not see that We have made [them] a secure
sanctuary a though all around them people are snatched away? Then
how can they believe in what is false and deny God’s blessing? 68 Who
could be more wicked than the person who invents lies about God,
or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is Hell not the home for
the disbelievers? 69 But We shall be sure to guide to Our ways those
who strive hard for Our cause: God is with those who do good.
a

Mecca.

30. THE BYZANTINES
A Meccan sura which opens with a reference to the defeat of the Byzantines at
the hands of the Persians (613–14 ce) in Syria, and the subsequent victory of
the Byzantines in 624 ce. The sura urges people to reﬂect on the creation of
themselves, the heavens and earth, and all God’s wonders. God’s power to give
life to a barren land is repeated as an indication both of His ability to raise the
dead and of His mercy to mankind. The disbelievers are warned to believe
before it is too late; the Prophet is urged to persevere and to ignore the taunts of
the disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim
2 The Byzantines have been defeated 3 in a nearby land. They will
reverse their defeat with a victory 4 in a few years’ time a ––God is in
command, ﬁrst and last. On that day, the believers will rejoice 5 at
God’s help. He helps whoever He pleases: He is the Mighty, the
Merciful. 6 This is God’s promise: God never breaks His promise,
but most people do not know; 7 they only know the outer surface of
this present life and are heedless of the life to come. 8 Have they not
thought about their own selves? b God did not create the heavens and
earth and everything between them without a serious purpose and an
appointed time, yet many people deny that they will meet their Lord.
9 Have they not travelled through the land and seen how their
predecessors met their end? They were mightier than them: they
cultivated the earth more and built more upon it. Their own messengers also came to them with clear signs: God did not wrong
them; they wronged themselves. 10 Later the evildoers met a terrible
end for rejecting and [repeatedly] mocking God’s revelations. 11 God
brings creation into being; in the end He will reproduce it and it is to
Him you will be recalled.
12 On the Day the Hour arrives, the guilty will despair 13 and they
will have no intercessors among those partners they ascribed to
a When fortunes were reversed and the Byzantines won a victory, this was to please
the believers. This was also the year of the Muslim victory at Badr. The earlier defeat of
the Byzantines had been viewed by the Meccan pagans as a victory for paganism.
b Or ‘within’ themselves. See also 41: 53.

258

The Qur an

30: 14

God–– they will deny these partners. 14 When the Hour arrives, on
that Day people will be separated: 15 those who believed and did good
deeds will delight in a Garden, 16 while those who disbelieved and
denied Our messages and the meeting of the Hereafter will be
brought for punishment.
17 So celebrate God’s glory in the evening, in the morning––
18 praise is due to Him in the heavens and the earth–– in the late
afternoon, and at midday. 19 He brings the living out of the dead and
the dead out of the living. He gives life to the earth after death, and
you will be brought out in the same way. 20 One of His signs is that
He created you from dust and–– lo and behold!–– you became human
and scattered far and wide. 21 Another of His signs is that He created
spouses from among yourselves for you to live with in tranquillity:
He ordained love and kindness between you. There truly are signs in
this for those who reﬂect. 22 Another of His signs is the creation of the
heavens and earth, and the diversity of your languages and colours.
There truly are signs in this for those who know. 23 Among His signs
are your sleep, by night and by day, and your seeking His bounty.
There truly are signs in this for those who can hear. 24 Among His
signs, too, are that He shows you the lightning that terriﬁes and
inspires hope; that He sends water down from the sky to restore the
earth to life after death. There truly are signs in this for those who
use their reason. 25 Among His signs, too, is the fact that the heavens
and the earth stand ﬁrm by His command. In the end, you will all
emerge when He calls you from the earth. 26 Everyone in the heavens
and earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to Him. 27 He is the
One who originates creation and will do it again–– this is even easier
for Him. He is above all comparison in the heavens and earth; He is
the Almighty, the All Wise.
28 He gives you this example, drawn from your own lives: do you
make your slaves full partners with an equal share in what We have
given you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? This is how
We make Our messages clear to those who use their reason. 29 And
still the idolaters follow their own desires without any knowledge.
Who can guide those God leaves to stray, who have no one to help
them? 30 So [Prophet] as a man of pure faith, stand ﬁrm and true in
your devotion to a the religion. This is the natural disposition God
a

Literally ‘set your face to’.

30: 45

The Byzantines

259

instilled in mankind–– there is no altering God’s creation–– and this
is the right religion, though most people do not realize it. 31 Turn
to Him alone, all of you. Be mindful of Him; keep up the prayer;
do not join those who ascribe partners to God, 32 those who divide
their religion into sects, with each party rejoicing in their own.
33 When something bad happens to people, they cry to their Lord
and turn to Him for help, but no sooner does He let them taste His
blessing than–– lo and behold!–– some of them ascribe partners to
their Lord, 34 showing no gratitude for what We have given them.
‘Take your pleasure! You will come to know.’ 35 Did We send them
down any authority that sanctions the partners they ascribe to
God?
36 When We give people a taste of Our blessing, they rejoice, but
when something bad happens to them–– because of their own
actions–– they fall into utter despair. 37 Do they not see that God
gives abundantly to whoever He will and sparingly [to whoever He
will]? There truly are signs in this for those who believe. 38 So give
their due to the near relative, the needy, and the wayfarer–– that is
best for those whose goal is God’s approval: a these are the ones who
will prosper. 39 Whatever you lend out in usury to gain value through
other people’s wealth will not increase in God’s eyes, but whatever
you give in charity, in your desire for God’s approval, will earn
multiple rewards. 40 It is God who created you and provided for you,
who will cause you to die and then give you life again. Which of
your ‘partners’ can do any one of these things? Glory be to God, and
exalted be He above the partners they attribute to Him. 41 Corruption has ﬂourished on land and sea as a result of people’s actions and
He will make them taste the consequences of some of their own
actions so that they may turn back. 42 Say, ‘Travel through the land,
and see how those before you met their end–– most of them were
idolaters.’ 43 [Prophet], stand ﬁrm in your devotion to the upright
religion, before an irresistible Day comes from God. On that Day,
mankind will be divided: 44 those who rejected the truth will bear the
burden of that rejection, and those who did good deeds will have
made good provision for themselves. 45 From His bounty God will
reward those who believe and do good deeds; He does not like those
who reject the truth.
a

Literally ‘face’.

260

The Qur an

30: 46

46 Another of His signs is that He sends out the winds bearing
good news, giving you a taste of His grace, making the ships sail at
His command, enabling you to [journey in] search of His bounty so
that you may be grateful. 47 Before you [Muhammad], We sent messengers, each to their own people: they brought them clear proofs
and then We punished the evildoers. We make it Our duty to help
the believers. 48 It is God who sends out the winds; they stir up the
clouds; He spreads them over the skies as He pleases; He makes
them break up and you see the rain falling from them. See how they
rejoice when He makes it fall upon whichever of His servants He
wishes, 49 though before it is sent they may have lost all hope. 50 Look,
then, at the imprints of God’s mercy, how He restores the earth to
life after death: this same God is the one who will return people to
life after death–– He has power over all things. 51 Yet they will continue in their disbelief, even if We send a [scorching] wind and they
see their crops turn yellow. 52 You [Prophet] cannot make the dead
hear and you cannot make the deaf hear your call when they turn
their backs and leave; 53 you cannot lead the blind out of their error:
the only ones you can make hear you are those who believe in Our
revelations and devote themselves [to Us]. 54 It is God who creates
you weak, then gives you strength, then weakness after strength,
together with your grey hair: He creates what He will; He is the All
Knowing, the All Powerful.
55 On the Day the Hour comes, the guilty will swear they lingered
no more than an hour–– they have always been deluded–– 56 but those
endowed with knowledge and faith will say, ‘In accordance with
God’s decree, you actually lingered till the Day of Resurrection: this
is the Day of Resurrection, yet you did not know.’ 57 On that Day the
evildoers’ excuses will be of no use to them: they will not be allowed
to make amends.
58 In this Qur an We have set every kind of illustration before
people, yet if you [Prophet] brought them a miracle, the disbelievers
would still say, ‘You [prophets] deal only in falsehood.’ 59 In this
way God seals the hearts of those who do not know, 60 so be patient,
for God’s promise is true: do not let those with no ﬁrm beliefs
discourage you.

31. LUQMAN
A Meccan sura that takes its title from Luqman the Wise, whose counsel to his
son is related in verses 13–19. The sura opens with a description of the
believers, and it condemns those who attempt to lead others away from guidance. It extols God’s power and warns the disbelievers of the consequences of
their actions. The Prophet is told not to be saddened by their disbelief.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim
2 These are the verses of the wise Scripture, 3 [with] guidance and
mercy for those who do good, 4 who keep up the prayer, pay the
prescribed alms, and are certain of the Hereafter: 5 these are rightly
guided by their Lord, and it is they who will prosper. 6 But there is
the sort of person who pays for distracting tales, intending, without
any knowledge, to lead others from God’s way, and to hold it up to
ridicule. a There will be humiliating torment for him! 7 When Our
verses are recited to him, he turns away disdainfully as if he had not
heard them, as if there were heaviness in his ears. Tell him that there
will be a painful torment! 8 But for those who believe and do righteous deeds, there will be Gardens of bliss 9 where they will stay: that
is God’s true promise, and He is the Almighty, the All Wise. 10 He
created the heavens without any visible support, and He placed ﬁrm
mountains on the earth––in case it should shake under you––and He
spread all kinds of animals around it. We sent down water from the
sky, with which We made every kind of good plant grow on earth:
11 all this is God’s creation. Now, show Me what your other gods
have created. No, the disbelievers are clearly astray.
12 We endowed Luqman with wisdom: ‘Be thankful to God:
whoever gives thanks beneﬁts his own soul, and as for those
who are thankless––God is self-suﬃcient, worthy of all praise.’
13 Luqman counselled his son, ‘My son, do not attribute any partners
to God: attributing partners to Him is a terrible wrong.’
a Understood to refer to al-Nadr ibn al-Harith, who bought some ancient Persian
stories to distract the people of Quraysh from listening to the Qur an.

262

31: 14

The Qur an

14 We have commanded people to be good to their parents: their
mothers carried them, with strain upon strain, and it takes two years
to wean them. Give thanks to Me and to your parents–– all will
return to Me. 15 If they strive to make you associate with Me anything about which you have no knowledge, a then do not obey them.
Yet keep their company in this life according to what is right, and
follow the path of those who turn to Me. You will all return to Me in
the end, and I will tell you everything that you have done.
16 [And Luqman continued], ‘My son, if even the weight of a
mustard seed were hidden in a rock or anywhere in the heavens or
earth, God would bring it [to light], for He is all subtle and all aware.
17 Keep up the prayer, my son; command what is right; forbid what is
wrong; bear anything that happens to you steadfastly: these are
things to be aspired to. 18 Do not turn your nose up at people, nor
walk about the place arrogantly, for God does not love arrogant or
boastful people. 19 Go at a moderate pace and lower your voice, for
the ugliest of all voices is the braying of asses.’
20 [People], do you not see how God has made what is in the
heavens and on the earth useful to you, and has lavished His blessings on you both outwardly and inwardly? Yet some people argue
about God, without knowledge or guidance or an illuminating scripture. 21 When they are told, ‘Follow what God has sent down,’ they
say: ‘We shall follow what we saw our forefathers following.’ What!
Even if Satan is calling them to the suﬀering of the Blazing Flame?
22 Whoever directs himself b wholly to God and does good work has
grasped the surest handhold, for the outcome of everything is with
God. 23 As for those who refuse to do this, do not let their refusal
sadden you [Prophet]–– they will return to Us and We shall tell them
what they have done: God knows all that hearts contain–– 24 We let
them enjoy themselves for a little while, but We shall drive them to
a harsh torment. 25 If you ask them who created the heavens and
earth, they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praise belongs to God,’ but
most of them do not understand. 26 Everything in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. God is self-suﬃcient and worthy of all praise.
27 If all the trees on earth were pens and all the seas, with seven more
seas besides, [were ink,] still God’s words would not run out: God is
almighty and all wise. 28 Creating and resurrecting all of you is only
a

i.e. scriptural proof.

b

Literally ‘his face’.

31: 34

Luqman

263

like creating or resurrecting a single soul: God is all hearing and all
seeing.
29 [Prophet], do you not see that God causes the night to merge
into day and the day to merge into night; that He has subjected the
sun and the moon, each to run its course for a stated term; that He is
aware of everything you [people] do? 30 This is because God is the
Truth, and what they invoke beside Him is false. He is the Most
High, Most Great. 31 [Prophet], do you not see that ships sail
through the sea, by the grace of God, to show you [people] some of
His wonders? Truly there are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person. 32 When the waves loom over those on board like giant
shadows they call out to God, devoting their religion entirely to
Him. But, when He has delivered them safely to land, some of them
waver–– only a treacherous, thankless person refuses to acknowledge
Our signs. 33 People, be mindful of your Lord and fear a day when no
parent will take the place of their child, nor a child take the place of
their parent, in any way. God’s promise is true, so do not let the
present life delude you, nor let the Deceiver delude you about God.
34 Knowledge of the Hour [of Resurrection] belongs to God; it is He
who sends down the relieving rain and He who knows what is hidden
in the womb. No soul knows what it will reap tomorrow, and no soul
knows in what land it will die; it is God who is all knowing and
all aware.

32. BOWING DOWN IN WORSHIP
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the bowing down of true believers in
worship in verse 15. The truth of the Qur an is emphasized at the beginning of
the sura, and the Prophet is urged at the end of the sura to pay no attention to
the disbelievers who cannot see the signiﬁcance of God’s signs.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Alif Lam Mim
2 This scripture, free from all doubt, has been sent down from the
Lord of the Worlds. 3 Yet they say, ‘Muhammad has made it up.’ No
indeed! It is the Truth from your Lord for you [Prophet], to warn a
people who have had no one to warn them before, so that they may
be guided. 4 It is God who created the heavens and the earth and
everything between them in six Days. Then He established Himself
on the Throne. You [people] have no one but Him to protect you and
no one to intercede for you, so why do you not take heed? 5 He runs
everything, from the heavens to the earth, and everything will ascend
to Him in the end, on a Day that will measure a thousand years in
your reckoning. 6 Such is He who knows all that is unseen as well as
what is seen, the Almighty, the Merciful, 7 who gave everything its
perfect form. He ﬁrst created man from clay, 8 then made his descendants from an extract of underrated ﬂuid. a 9 Then He moulded
him; He breathed from His Spirit into him; He gave you hearing,
sight, and minds. How seldom you are grateful! 10 They say, ‘What?
When we have disappeared into the earth, shall we really be created
anew?’ In fact, they deny the meeting with their Lord. 11 Say, ‘The
Angel of Death put in charge of you will reclaim you, and then you
will be brought back to your Lord.’
12 [Prophet], if only you could see the wrongdoers hang their
heads before their Lord: ‘Our Lord, now that we have seen and
heard, send us back and we shall do good. [Now] we are convinced.’
13 ‘If it had been Our will, We could certainly have given every soul
its true guidance, but My words have come true. “I shall be sure to
a

Semen.

32: 30

Bowing down in Worship

265

ﬁll Hell with jinn and men together.” 14 So since you ignored the
meeting on this Day of yours, now We shall ignore you: taste the
lasting suﬀering for all you have done.’
15 The only people who truly believe in Our messages are those
who, when they are reminded of them, bow down in worship, celebrate their Lord’s praises, and do not think themselves above this.
16 Their sides shun their beds in order to pray to their Lord in fear
and hope; they give to others some of what We have given them.
17 No soul knows what joy is kept hidden in store for them as a
reward for what they have done. 18 So, is someone who believes equal
to someone who deﬁes God? No, they are not equal. 19 Those who
believe and do good deeds will have Gardens awaiting them as their
home and as a reward for what they have done. 20 As for those who
defy God, their home will be the Fire. Whenever they try to escape
it, they will be driven back into it, and they will be told, ‘Taste the
torment of the Fire, which you persistently denied.’ 21 We shall certainly make them taste a nearer torment [in this life] prior to the
greater torment, so that perhaps they may return [to the right path].
22 Who does more wrong than someone who, when messages from his
Lord are recited to him, turns away from them? We shall inﬂict
retribution on the guilty.
23 We gave Moses the Scripture–– so [Muhammad] do not doubt
that you are receiving it–– and We made it a guide for the Children of
Israel. 24 When they became steadfast and believed ﬁrmly in Our
messages, We raised leaders among them, guiding them according to
Our command. 25 [Prophet], it is your Lord who will judge between
them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their diﬀerences.
26 Is it not a lesson for them [to see] how many generations We
destroyed before them, in whose homes they now walk? There truly
are signs in this–– do they not hear? 27 Do they not consider how We
drive rain to the barren land, and with it produce vegetation from
which their cattle and they themselves eat? Do they not see? 28 And
they say, ‘When will this Decision be, if you are telling the truth?’
29 Say, ‘On the Day of Decision it will be no use for the disbelievers
to believe; they will be granted no respite.’ 30 So [Prophet], turn away
from them and wait: they too are waiting.

33. THE JOINT FORCES
A Medinan sura which gets its title from the incident of the Battle of the Trench
in ah 5/627 ce (verses 9–27), when the joint forces of various tribes of
disbelievers besieged Medina. The believers dug a ditch, which the disbelievers
were unable to cross, and eventually the enemy retreated in disarray. This is
mentioned in order to remind the believers of God’s goodness to them, so that
they may obey the numerous instructions given in the sura, starting with the
regulation of adoption and including proper conduct towards the Prophet and
his wives. The hypocrites are warned to stop their bad behaviour.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Prophet, be mindful of God and do not give in to the disbelievers
and the hypocrites: God is all knowing, all wise. 2 Follow what your
Lord reveals to you: God is well aware of all your actions. 3 Put your
trust in God: God is enough to trust. 4 God does not put two hearts
within a man’s breast. He does not turn the wives you reject and
liken to your mothers’ backs a into your real mothers; nor does He
make your adopted sons into real sons. These are only words from
your mouths, while God speaks the truth and guides people to the
right path.
5 Name your adopted sons after their real fathers: this is more
equitable in God’s eyes––if you do not know who their fathers are
[they are your] ‘brothers-in-religion’ and protégés. b You will not be
blamed if you make a mistake, only for what your hearts deliberately
intend; God is most forgiving and merciful. 6 The Prophet is more
protective towards the believers than they are themselves, while his
wives are their mothers. c In God’s Scripture, blood-relatives have a
stronger claim than other believers and emigrants, though you may
still bestow gifts on your protégés. All this is written in the Scripture.

a In pre-Islamic Arabia the husband sometimes said to his wife, ‘From now on, you
are to me like my mother’s back,’ by which he meant that he refused to have further
conjugal relations with her, yet did not divorce her and so give her the freedom to
remarry (see 58: 1–4).
b Mawla in Arabic has many meanings, including ‘protégé’, ‘client’, ‘companion’.
c The Prophet’s wives were given the title ‘Mothers of the Believers’. Cf. verse 53.

33: 20

The Joint Forces

267

7 We took a solemn pledge from the prophets–– from you
[Muhammad], from Noah, from Abraham, from Moses, from Jesus,
son of Mary–– We took a solemn pledge from all of them: 8 God will
question [even] the truthful about their sincerity, and for those who
reject the truth He has prepared a painful torment.
9 You who believe, remember God’s goodness to you when mighty
armies massed against you: We sent a violent wind and invisible
forces against them. God sees all that you do. 10 They massed against
you from above and below; your eyes rolled [with fear], your hearts
rose into your throats, and you thought [ill] thoughts of God.
11 There the believers were sorely tested and deeply shaken: 12 the
hypocrites and the sick at heart said, ‘God and His Messenger
promised us nothing but delusions!’ 13 Some of them said, ‘People of
Yathrib, a you will not be able to withstand [the attack], so go back!’
Some of them asked the Prophet’s permission to leave, saying, ‘Our
houses are exposed,’ even though they were not–– they just wanted
to run away: 14 had the city been invaded from all sides, and the
enemy invited them to rebel, they would have done so almost without hesitation. 15 Yet they had already promised God that they would
not turn tail and ﬂee, and a promise to God will be answered for.
16 [Prophet], say, ‘Running away will not beneﬁt you. If you manage
to escape death or slaughter, you will only be permitted to enjoy
[life] for a short while.’ 17 Say, ‘If God wishes to harm you, who can
protect you? If God wishes to show you mercy, who can prevent
Him?’ They will ﬁnd no one but God to protect or help them.
18 God knows exactly who among you hinder others, who
[secretly] say to their brothers, ‘Come and join us,’ who hardly ever
come out to ﬁght, 19 who begrudge you [believers] any help. When
fear comes, b you [Prophet] see them looking at you with eyes rolling
like someone in their death throes; when fear has passed, they attack
you with sharp tongues and begrudge you any good. Such men do
not believe, and God brings their deeds to nothing–– that is all too
easy for God. 20 They think the joint forces have not gone, and if the
joint forces did come again they would wish they were in the desert,
wandering among the Bedouin and seeking news about you [from a
safe distance]. Even if they were with you [believers], they would
a
b

The pre-Islamic name for Medina.
This speciﬁcally refers to fear felt in battle in this context (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).

268

The Qur an

33: 21

hardly ﬁght at all. 21 The Messenger of God is an excellent model for
those of you who put your hope in God and the Last Day and
remember Him often.
22 When the believers saw the joint forces, they said, ‘This is what
God and His Messenger promised us: the promise of God and His
Messenger is true,’ and this only served to increase their faith and
submission to God. 23 There are men among the believers who honoured their pledge to God: some of them have fulﬁlled it by death,
and some are still waiting. They have not changed in the least.
24 [Such trials are ordained] so that God may reward the truthful for
their honesty and punish the hypocrites, if He so wills, or He may
relent towards them, for God is forgiving and merciful. 25 God sent
back the disbelievers a along with their rage–– they gained no beneﬁt–– and spared the believers from ﬁghting. He is strong and mighty.
26 He brought those People of the Book who supported them down
from their strongholds and put panic into their hearts. Some of
them you [believers] killed and some you took captive. 27 He passed
on to you their land, their houses, their possessions, and a land where
you had not set foot: God has power over everything.
28 Prophet, say to your wives, b ‘If your desire is for the present life
and its ﬁnery, then come, I will make provision for you and release
you with kindness, 29 but if you desire God, His Messenger, and the
Final Home, then remember that God has prepared great rewards
for those of you who do good.’ 30 Wives of the Prophet, if any of you
does something clearly outrageous, she will be doubly punished––
that is easy for God–– 31 but if any of you is obedient to God and His
Messenger and does good deeds, know that We shall give her a
double reward and have prepared a generous provision for her.
32 Wives of the Prophet, you are not like any other woman. If you are
truly mindful of God, do not speak too softly in case the sick at heart
should lust after you, but speak in an appropriate manner; 33 stay at
home, and do not ﬂaunt your ﬁnery as they used to in the pagan past;
keep up the prayer, give the prescribed alms, and obey God and His
Messenger. God wishes to keep uncleanness away from you, people
of the [Prophet’s] House, and to purify you thoroughly. 34 Remember
a

This refers to the sandstorm that caused the disbelievers to go back without success.
Some of the Prophet’s wives decided to ask him for more provision, seeing that he
had become leader of a new state.
b

33: 48

The Joint Forces

269

what is recited in your houses of God’s revelations and wisdom, for
God is all subtle, all aware.
35 For men and women who are devoted to God–– believing men
and women, obedient men and women, truthful men and women,
steadfast men and women, humble men and women, charitable
men and women, fasting men and women, chaste men and women,
men and women who remember God often–– God has prepared
forgiveness and a rich reward.
36 When God and His Messenger have decided on a matter that
concerns them, it is not ﬁtting for any believing man or woman to
claim freedom of choice in that matter: whoever disobeys God and
His Messenger is far astray. 37 When you [Prophet] said to the man
who had been favoured by God and by you, ‘Keep your wife and be
mindful of God,’ you hid in your heart what God would later reveal:
you were afraid of people, but it is more ﬁtting that you fear God.
When Zayd no longer wanted her, a We gave her to you in marriage
so that there might be no fault in believers marrying the wives of
their adopted sons after they no longer wanted them. God’s command must be carried out: 38 the Prophet is not at fault for what God
has ordained for him. This was God’s practice with those who went
before–– God’s command must be fulﬁlled–– 39 [and with all] those
who deliver God’s messages and fear only Him and no other: God’s
reckoning is enough. 40 Muhammad is not the father of any one of
you men; he is God’s Messenger and the seal of the prophets: God
knows everything. 41 Believers, remember God often 42 and glorify
Him morning and evening: 43 it is He who blesses you, as do His
angels, in order to lead you out of the depths of darkness into the
light. He is ever merciful towards the believers–– 44 when they meet
Him they will be greeted with ‘Peace’–– and He has prepared a
generous reward for them.
45 Prophet, We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news
and warning, 46 as one who calls people to God by His leave, as a
light-giving lamp. 47 Give the believers the good news that great
bounty awaits them from God. 48 Do not give in to the disbelievers
and the hypocrites: ignore the harm they cause you and put your
trust in God. God is enough to trust.
a The Prophet married Zayd, his adopted son, to Zaynab, his own cousin. Zayd later
divorced her and the Prophet took her as his own wife. This sura shows the marriage to
be lawful since adoption does not create blood relations that preclude marriage.

270

The Qur an

33: 49

49 Believers, you have no right to expect a waiting period when
you marry believing women and then divorce them before you
have touched them: make provision for them and release them in
an honourable way. 50 Prophet, We have made lawful for you the
wives whose bride gift you have paid, and any slaves God has
assigned to you through war, and the daughters of your uncles
and aunts on your father’s and mother’s sides, who migrated with
you. Also any believing woman who has oﬀered herself to the
Prophet and whom the Prophet wishes to wed–– this is only for you
[Prophet] and not the rest of the believers: We know exactly what
We have made obligatory for them concerning their wives and
slave-girls–– so you should not be blamed: God is most forgiving,
most merciful. 51 You may make any of [your women] wait and
receive any of them as you wish, but you will not be at fault if
you invite one whose turn you have previously set aside: this way
it is more likely that they will be satisﬁed and will not be distressed and will all be content with what you have given them.
God knows what is in your hearts: God is all knowing, forbearing.
52 You [Prophet] are not permitted to take any further wives, nor
to exchange the wives you have for others, even if these attract
you with their beauty. But this does not apply to your slave-girls:
God is watchful over all.
53 Believers, do not enter the Prophet’s apartments for a meal
unless you are given permission to do so; do not linger until [a
meal] is ready. When you are invited, go in; then, when you have
taken your meal, leave. Do not stay on and talk, for that would
oﬀend the Prophet, though he would shrink from asking you to
leave. God does not shrink from the truth. When you ask his
wives for something, do so from behind a screen: this is purer
both for your hearts and for theirs. It is not right for you to
oﬀend God’s Messenger, just as you should never marry his wives
after him: that would be grievous in God’s eyes. 54 God has full
knowledge of all things, whether you reveal them or not. 55 The
Prophet’s wives are not to blame [if they are seen by] their
fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their women, or their slaves. [Wives of the Prophet], be
mindful of God. God observes everything. 56 God and His angels
bless the Prophet–– so, you who believe, bless him too and give
him greetings of peace. 57 Those who insult God and His Messen-

33: 73

The Joint Forces

271

ger will be rejected by God in this world and the next–– He has
prepared a humiliating torment for them–– 58 and those who
undeservedly insult believing men and women will bear the guilt
of slander and ﬂagrant sin.
59 Prophet, tell your wives, your daughters, and women believers
to make their outer garments hang low over them a so as to be recognized and not insulted: God is most forgiving, most merciful. 60 If the
hypocrites, the sick at heart, and those who spread lies in the city do
not desist, We shall rouse you [Prophet] against them, and then they
will only be your neighbours in this city for a short while. 61 They
will be rejected. Wherever they are found, they will be arrested and
put to death. 62 This has been God’s practice with those who went
before. You will ﬁnd no change in God’s practices.
63 People ask you about the Hour. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge
of it.’ How could you [Prophet] know? The Hour may well be near.
64 God has rejected the disbelievers and prepared a blazing ﬁre for
them. 65 There they will stay permanently, with no one to befriend or
support them. 66 On the Day when their faces are being turned about
in the Fire, they will say, ‘If only we had obeyed God and the
Messenger,’ 67 and ‘Lord! We obeyed our masters and our chiefs, and
they led us astray. 68 Lord! Give them a double punishment and reject
them completely.’
69 Believers, do not be like those who insulted Moses–– God
cleared him of their allegations and he was highly honoured in God’s
eyes. 70 Believers, be mindful of God, speak in a direct fashion and to
good purpose, 71 and He will put your deeds right for you and forgive
you your sins. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will truly
achieve a great triumph. 72 We oﬀered the Trust b to the heavens, the
earth, and the mountains, yet they refused to undertake it and were
afraid of it; mankind undertook it–– they have always been inept c and
foolish. 73 God will punish the hypocrites and the idolaters, both men
and women, and turn with mercy to the believers, both men and
women: God is most forgiving, most merciful.
a The Arabic idiom adna al-jilbab means ‘make it hang low’, not ‘wrap around’ as
other translators have assumed (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).
b [Of reason and moral responsibility]
c The meaning of dhalama is ‘put something out of its place’.

34. SHEBA
A Meccan sura that takes its name from the people of Sheba who were blessed,
and then punished for their ingratitude (verses 15–21). The Prophet is ﬁrst
encouraged through references to David and Solomon and how God favoured
them. The disbelievers of Mecca are warned through a description of the
punishment that awaits them on the Day of Resurrection. Two references are
made to their accusing the Prophet of madness (verses 8 and 46) and this charge is
thoroughly refuted.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Praise be to God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and
earth, and praise be to Him in the life to come. He is the All Wise,
the All Aware. 2 He knows all that goes into the earth and all that
comes out of it; He knows all that comes down from the heavens and
all that goes up to them. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving. 3 Still, the
disbelievers say, ‘The Last Hour will never come upon us.’ Say, ‘Yes,
by my Lord, [it will], by Him who knows the unseen! Not even the
weight of a speck of dust in the heavens or earth escapes His knowledge, nor anything smaller or greater. It is all recorded in a clear
Record 4 so that He can reward those who believe and do good deeds:
they will have forgiveness and generous provision.’ 5 But as for those
who work against Our Revelations, seeking to undermine them,
there will be a torment of painful suﬀering.
6 [Prophet], those who have been given knowledge can see that
what has been sent to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it
leads to the path of the Almighty, worthy of all praise. 7 But the
disbelievers say, ‘Shall we show you a man who claims that, when
you have been utterly torn to pieces, you will be raised in a new
creation? 8 Has he invented a lie about God? Is he mad?’ No! It is
those who do not believe in the life to come who will suﬀer torment,
for they are in gross error. 9 Do they not think about what is in front
of them and behind them in the heavens and earth? If We wished,
We could make the earth swallow them, or make fragments from the
heavens fall down upon them. There truly is a sign in this for every
servant who turns back to God in repentance.

34: 21

Sheba

273

10 We graced David with Our favour. We said, ‘You mountains,
echo God’s praises together with him, and you birds, too.’ We
softened iron for him, 11 saying, ‘Make coats of chain mail and
measure the links well.’ ‘Do good, all of you, for I see everything
you do.’ 12 And [We subjected] the wind for Solomon. Its outward
journey took a month, and its return journey likewise. We made a
fountain of molten brass ﬂow for him, and some of the jinn
worked under his control with his Lord’s permission. If one of
them deviated from Our command, We let him taste the suﬀering
of the blazing ﬂame. 13 They made him whatever he wanted––
palaces, a statues, basins as large as water troughs, ﬁxed cauldrons.
We said, ‘Work thankfully, family of David, for few of my servants
are truly thankful.’ 14 Then, when We decreed Solomon’s death,
nothing showed the jinn he was dead, but a creature of the earth
eating at his stick: when he fell down they realized–– if they had
known what was hidden they would not have continued their
demeaning labour.
15 There was a sign for the people of Sheba, too, in their dwelling
place: two gardens, one on the right, one on the left: ‘Eat from what
your Lord has provided for you and give Him thanks, for your land is
good, and your Lord most forgiving.’ 16 But they paid no heed, so We
let loose on them a ﬂood from the dam and replaced their two gardens with others that yielded bitter fruit, tamarisk bushes, and a few
lote trees. b 17 In this way We punished them for their ingratitude––
would We punish anyone but the ungrateful? 18 Also, We had placed,
between them and the towns We had blessed, other towns within
sight of one another to which they could travel easily––‘ Travel safely
in this land by night and by day’–– 19 but [still] they complained, ‘Our
Lord has made the distance between our staging posts so long!’ c
They wronged themselves and, in the end, We made their fate a
byword, and scattered them in countless fragments. There truly are
signs in this for every patient, thankful person. 20 Satan was proved
right in his opinion of them, for they all followed him–– except for a
group of believers–– 21 even though he had no authority over them.
Mihrab refers to a number of ﬁne ediﬁces, including palaces (al-Mu jam al-Wasit).
Lote tree: a thorny tree, also known as Christ-thorn, with edible fruit.
c For this reading see A. H. Omar and A. S. Makram, Mu jam al-Qira at alQur aniyya (Tehran, 1999), under this verse reference. This seems to make better sense
than the other reading ‘Lord, make our journeys further apart’.
a
b

274

The Qur an

34: 22

But [We aim] to distinguish those who believe in the life to
come from those who doubt it: [Prophet], your Lord observes
everything.
22 Say, ‘Pray to your so-called gods besides God: they do not control even the weight of a speck of dust in heaven or earth, nor do they
have any share in them, nor are any of them any help to God. 23 Intercession will not work with Him, except by those to whom He gives
permission.’ They will be asked, after the terror is lifted from their
hearts [on the Day of Judgement], ‘What did your Lord speak?’ and
they will answer, ‘The Truth. He is the Most High, the Most Great.’
24 Say [Prophet], ‘Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and
earth?’ Say, ‘God does,’ and ‘[One party of us] must be rightly
guided and the other clearly astray.’ 25 Say, ‘You will not be questioned about our sins, nor will we be questioned about what you do.’
26 Say, ‘Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge justly
between us; He alone is the All Knowing Judge.’ 27 Say, ‘Show me
those you joined to Him as partners. No indeed! He alone is God,
the Almighty, the All Wise.’ 28 We have sent you [Prophet] only to
bring good news and warning to all people, but most of them do
not understand. 29 And they say, ‘If what you say is true, when will
this promise be fulﬁlled?’ 30 Say, ‘You have an appointment for a
Day which you cannot put oﬀ nor bring forward, even by a single
moment.’ a
31 The disbelievers say, ‘We will believe neither this Qur an nor the
Scriptures that came before it.’ If only you could see [Prophet] how
the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, hurling
reproaches at one another. Those who were oppressed will say to the
oppressors, ‘If it were not for you, we would have been believers.’
32 The oppressors will say to them, ‘Was it we who prevented you
from following right guidance after it had reached you? No! You
yourselves were sinners.’ 33 The oppressed will say to them, ‘No, it
was your scheming, night and day, ordering us to disbelieve in God
and set up rivals to Him.’ When they see the punishment, they will
fall silent with regret, and We shall put iron collars on the disbelievers’ necks. Why should they be rewarded for anything other
than what they have done? 34 Never have We sent a warner to a
community without those among them who were corrupted by
a

Not ‘an hour’ (al-Mu jam al-Wasit ).

34: 50

Sheba

275

wealth saying, ‘We do not believe in the message you have been sent
with.’ 35 They would say, ‘We have greater wealth and more children
than you, and we shall not be punished.’ 36 Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord
gives in abundance to whoever He will and sparingly to whoever He
will, though most people do not understand. 37 Neither wealth nor
children will bring you nearer to Us, but those who believe and do
good deeds will have multiple rewards for what they have done, and
will live safely in the lofty dwellings of Paradise, 38 whereas those who
work against Our messages, seeking to undermine them, will be
summoned to punishment.’ 39 Say, ‘My Lord gives in abundance to
whichever of His servants He will, and sparingly to whichever He
will; He will replace whatever you give in alms; He is the best of
providers.’
40 On the Day He gathers them all together, He will say to the
angels, ‘Was it you these people worshipped?’ 41 They will reply,
‘May You be exalted! You are our supporter against them! Really,
they worshipped the jinn–– most of them believed in them.’ 42 ‘So
today neither of you has any power to beneﬁt or harm the other,’
We shall tell the evildoers, ‘Taste the torment of the ﬁre which you
called a lie.’ 43 When Our messages are recited to them, clear as
they are, they say, ‘This is only a man who wants to turn you away
from what your forefathers worshipped,’ and, ‘This [Qur an] is
nothing but lies he has made up.’ When the Truth comes to the
disbelievers, they say, ‘This is just plain sorcery,’ 44 though We have
not given them any books to study nor sent any warner before you.
45 Those who lived before them also denied the truth–– these people
have not attained even a tenth of what We gave their predecessors–– they, too, rejected My messengers, and how terrible My
condemnation was!
46 Say [Prophet], ‘I advise you to do one thing only: stand before
God, in pairs or singly, and think: there is no sign of madness in
your companion [the Prophet]–– he is only warning you before
severe suﬀering arrives.’ 47 Say, ‘If I have asked you for any reward,
you can keep it. It is God alone who will reward me: He is witness to
everything.’ 48 Say, ‘My Lord hurls the Truth down [before you]. He
has full knowledge of all that is unseen.’ 49 Say, ‘The Truth has come;
falsehood is powerless.’ a 50 Say, ‘If I go astray, that is my loss, and if I
a The Arabic expression la yubdi wa-la yu id is an idiom meaning ‘powerless’. See
Zamakhshari, Asas al-Balagha.

276

The Qur an

34: 51

am rightly guided, it is through what my Lord has revealed to me.
He is all hearing, and ever near.’
51 [Prophet], if you could only see their terror! a There will be no
escape when they are seized from a nearby place; 52 they will say,
‘Now we believe in it,’ b but how can they reach it from such a distant
place–– 53 they denied it all in the past, and threw conjecture c from a
far-oﬀ place–– when a barrier has been placed between them and
what they desire, d just as was done with their kind before? They
were deep in doubt and suspicion.
a

On the Day of Resurrection.
The Truth.
c About God and the Hereafter.
d To be allowed to go back to the world and believe and do good deeds, cf. 35: 37.
b

35. THE CREATOR
A Meccan sura that aﬃrms God’s power and Creation and contrasts this with
the powerlessness and uselessness of the ‘partners’ set up by the idolaters. The
sura warns the idolaters of their punishment and comforts the Prophet through
mention of previous messengers who were also rejected as liars. The great
rewards that await believers are described.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Praise be to God, Creator of the heavens and earth, who made
angels messengers with two, three, four [pairs of] wings. He adds to
creation as He will: God has power over everything. 2 No one can
withhold the blessing God opens up for people, nor can anyone but
Him release whatever He withholds: He is the Almighty, the All
Wise. 3 People, remember God’s grace towards you. Is there any
creator other than God to give you sustenance from the heavens and
earth? There is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded?
4 If they call you a liar [Prophet], many messengers before you
were also called liars: it is to God that all things will be returned.
5 People! God’s promise is true, so do not let the present life deceive
you. Do not let the Deceiver deceive you about God: 6 Satan is your
enemy––so treat him as an enemy––and invites his followers only to
enter the blazing ﬁre. 7 Those who disbelieve will be punished
severely; those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven, and
richly rewarded. 8 What about those whose evil deeds are made
alluring to them so that they think they are good? God leaves whoever He will to stray and guides whoever He will. [Prophet], do not
waste your soul away with regret for them: God knows exactly what
they do.
9 It is God who sends forth the winds; they raise up the clouds; We
drive them to a dead land and with them revive the earth after
its death: such will be the Resurrection. 10 If anyone desires power,
all power belongs to God; good words rise up to Him and He lifts
up the righteous deed, but a severe torment awaits those who plot
evil and their plotting will come to nothing. 11 It is God who created
you from dust and later from a drop of ﬂuid; then He made you into

278

The Qur an

35: 12

two sexes; no female conceives or gives birth without His knowledge;
no person grows old or has his life cut short, except in accordance
with a Record: all this is easy for God.
12 The two bodies of water are not alike–– one is palatable, sweet,
and pleasant to drink, the other salty and bitter–– yet from each you
eat fresh ﬁsh and extract ornaments to wear, and in each you see the
ships ploughing their course so that you may seek God’s bounty and
be grateful. 13 He makes the night merge into the day and the day
into the night; He has subjected the sun and the moon–– each runs
for an appointed term. Such is God your Lord: all control belongs to
Him. Those you invoke beside Him do not even control the skin of a
date stone; 14 if you call them they cannot hear you; if they could
hear, they could not answer you; on the Day of Resurrection they
will disown your idolatry. None can inform you [Prophet] like the
One who is all aware.
15 People, it is you who stand in need of God–– God needs nothing
and is worthy of all praise–– 16 if He wills, He can do away with you
and bring in a new creation, 17 that is not diﬃcult for God. 18 No
burdened soul will bear the burden of another: even if a heavily laden
soul should cry for help, none of its load will be carried, not even by a
close relative. But you [Prophet] can only warn those who fear their
Lord, though they cannot see Him, and keep up the prayer––
whoever puriﬁes himself does so for his own beneﬁt–– everything
returns to God. 19 The blind and the seeing are not alike, 20 nor are
darkness and light; 21 shade and heat are not alike, 22 nor are the living
and the dead. God makes anyone He wills hear [His message]: you
cannot make those in their graves hear. 23 You are only here to warn
them–– 24 We have sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news
and warning–– every community has been sent a warner. 25 If they
call you a liar, their predecessors did the same: messengers came to
them with clear signs, scriptures, and enlightening revelation 26 and
afterwards I seized the disbelievers–– how terrible My punishment
was!
27 Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down
from the sky and that We produce with it fruits of varied colours;
that there are in the mountains layers of white and red of various
hues, and jet black; 28 that there are various colours among human
beings, wild animals, and livestock too? It is those of His servants
who have knowledge who stand in true awe of God. God is almighty,

35: 42

The Creator

279

most forgiving. 29 Those who recite God’s scripture, keep up the
prayer, give secretly and openly from what We have provided for
them, may hope for a trade that will never decline: 30 He will repay
them in full, and give them extra from His bounty. He is most
forgiving, most appreciative.
31 The Scripture We have revealed to you [Prophet] is the Truth
and conﬁrms the scriptures that preceded it. God is well informed
about His servants, He sees everything. 32 We gave the Scripture as a
heritage to Our chosen servants: some of them wronged their own
souls, some stayed between [right and wrong], and some, by God’s
leave, were foremost in good deeds. That is the greatest favour:
33 they will enter lasting Gardens where they will be adorned with
bracelets of gold and pearls, where they will wear silk garments.
34 They will say, ‘Praise be to God, who has separated us from all
sorrow! Our Lord is truly most forgiving, most appreciative: 35 He
has, in His bounty, settled us in the everlasting Home where no toil
or fatigue will touch us.’ 36 But those who reject the truth will stay in
Hellﬁre, where they will neither be ﬁnished oﬀ by death, nor be
relieved from Hell’s torment: this is how We reward hardened disbelievers. 37 They will cry out loud in Hell, ‘Lord, let us out, and we
will do righteous deeds, not what we did before!’––‘ Did We not give
you a life long enough to take warning if you were going to? The
warner came to you, now taste the punishment.’ The evildoers will
have nobody to help them.
38 God knows all that is hidden in the heavens and earth; He
knows the thoughts contained in the heart; 39 it is He who made
you [people] successors to the land. Those who deny the truth will
bear the consequences: their denial will only make them more
odious to their Lord, and add only to their loss. 40 Say, ‘Consider
those “partners” of yours that you call upon beside God. Show me!
What part of the earth did they create? What share of the heavens
do they possess?’ Have We given them a book that contains clear
evidence? No indeed! The idolaters promise each other only
delusion.
41 God keeps the heavens and earth from vanishing; if they did
vanish, no one else could stop them. God is most forbearing, most
forgiving. 42 [The idolaters] swore their most solemn oath that, if
someone came to warn them, they would be more rightly guided than
any [other] community, but when someone did come they turned

280

The Qur an

35: 43

yet further away, 43 became more arrogant in the land, and intensiﬁed
their plotting of evil–– the plotting of evil only rebounds on those
who plot. Do they expect anything but what happened to earlier
people? You will never ﬁnd any change in God’s practice; you will
never ﬁnd any deviation there. 44 Have they not travelled in the land
and seen how those before them met their end, although they were
superior to them in strength? God is not to be frustrated by anything
in the heavens or on the earth: He is all knowing, all powerful. 45 If
God were to punish people [at once] for the wrong they have done,
there would not be a single creature left on the surface of the earth.
He gives them respite for a stated time and, whenever their time
comes, God has been watching His servants.

36. YA SIN
A Meccan sura that emphasizes the divine source of the Qur an and defends it
from the charge of being poetry made by man (verses 5–6, 69–70). It warns of
the fate of men who are stubborn and always mock God’s revelations. They are
reminded of the punishment that befell earlier generations, and of God’s power
as shown in His Creation. The end of the sura gives strong arguments for the
reality of the Resurrection.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ya Sin
2 By the wise a Qur an, 3 you [Muhammad] are truly one of the messengers sent 4 on a straight path, 5 with a revelation from the
Almighty, the Lord of Mercy, 6 to warn a people whose forefathers
were not warned, and so they are unaware. 7 The verdict has been
passed against most of them, for they refuse to believe. 8 [It is as if]
We had placed [iron] collars around their necks, right up to their
chins so that their heads are forced up 9 and set barriers before and
behind them, blocking their vision: they cannot see. 10 It is all the
same to them whether you warn them or not: they will not believe.
11 You can warn only those who will follow the Qur an and hold the
Merciful One in awe, though they cannot see Him: give such people
the glad news of forgiveness and a noble reward. 12 We shall certainly
bring the dead back to life, and We record what they send ahead of
them as well as what they leave behind: We keep an account of
everything in a clear Record.
13 Give them the example of the people to whose town messengers
came. 14 We sent two messengers but they rejected both. Then We
reinforced them with a third. 15 They said, ‘Truly, we are messengers
to you,’ 16 but they answered, ‘You are only men like ourselves. The
Lord of Mercy has sent nothing; you are just lying.’ They said,
‘Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you. 17 Our duty is only to
deliver the message to you,’ 18 but they answered, ‘We think you are
a

See note to 10: 1.

282

The Qur an

36: 19

an evil omen. If you do not stop, we shall stone you, and inﬂict a
painful torment on you.’ 19 The messengers said, ‘The evil omen is
within yourselves. Why do you take it as an evil omen when you are
reminded of the Truth? You are going too far!’ 20 Then, from the
furthest part of the city, a man came running. He said, ‘My people,
follow the messengers. 21 Follow them: they are not asking you to
reward them and they are rightly guided. 22 Why should I not worship the One who created me? It is to Him that you will be returned.
23 How could I take besides Him any other gods, whose intercession
will not help me and who would not be able to save me if the Lord of
Mercy wished to harm me? 24 Then I would clearly be in the wrong.
25 I believe in your Lord, so listen to me.’
26 He was told, ‘Enter the Garden,’ a so he said, ‘If only my people
knew 27 how my Lord has forgiven me and set me among the highly
honoured.’ 28 After him We did not send any army from heaven
against his people, nor were We about to: 29 there was just one blast,
and they fell down lifeless.
30 Alas for human beings! Whenever a messenger comes to them
they ridicule him. 31 Do they not see how many generations We have
destroyed before them, none of whom will ever come back to them? b
32 [Yet] all of them will be brought before Us. 33 There is a sign for
them in the lifeless earth: We give it life and We produce grain from it
for them to eat; 34 We have put gardens of date palms and grapes in
the earth, and We have made springs of water gush out of it 35 so that
they could eat its fruit. It was not their own hands that made all this.
How can they not give thanks? 36 Glory be to Him who created all the
pairs c of things that the earth produces, as well as themselves and
other things they do not know about. 37 The night is also a sign for
them: We strip the daylight from it, and–– lo and behold!–– they are
in darkness. 38 The sun, too, runs its determined course laid down for
it by the Almighty, the All Knowing. 39 We have determined phases
for the moon until ﬁnally it becomes like an old date-stalk. 40 The sun
cannot overtake the moon, nor can the night outrun the day: each
ﬂoats in [its own] orbit.
41 Another sign for them is that We carried their seed in the laden
a

The implication may be that he was martyred, as his people die after him.
Another interpretation of this phrase is ‘none of them can trace [their genealogies]
back to them’, i.e. God wiped out the entire line.
c Or ‘varieties’.
b

36: 68

Ya Sin

283

Ark, 42 and We have made similar things for them to ride in. 43 If We
wished, We could drown them, and there would be no one to help
them: they could not be saved. 44 Only by Our mercy could they be
reprieved to enjoy life for a while. 45 Yet when they are told, ‘Beware
of what lies before and behind you, so that you may be given mercy,’
46 they ignore every single sign that comes to them from their Lord,
47 and when they are told, ‘Give to others out of what God has
provided for you,’ the disbelievers say to the believers, ‘Why should
we feed those that God could feed if He wanted? You must be deeply
misguided.’
48 And they say, ‘When will this promise be fulﬁlled, if what you
say is true?’ 49 But all they are waiting for is a single blast that will
overtake them while they are still arguing with each other. 50 They
will have no time to make bequests, nor will they have the chance to
return to their own people.
51 The Trumpet will be sounded and–– lo and behold!–– they will
rush out to their Lord from their graves. 52 They will say, ‘Alas for us!
Who has resurrected us from our resting places?’ [They will be told],
‘This is what the Lord of Mercy promised, and the messengers told
the truth.’ 53 It was just one single blast and then–– lo and behold!––
they were all brought before Us. 54 ‘Today, no soul will be wronged in
the least: you will only be repaid for your deeds. 55 The people of
Paradise today are happily occupied–– 56 they and their spouses––
seated on couches in the shade. 57 There they have fruit and whatever
they ask for. 58 “Peace,” a word from the Lord of Mercy. 59 But step
aside today, you guilty ones. 60 Children of Adam, did I not command
you not to serve Satan, for he was your sworn enemy, 61 but to serve
Me? This is the straight path. 62 He has led great numbers of you
astray. Did you not use your reason? 63 So this is the Fire that you
were warned against. 64 Enter it today, because you went on ignoring
[my commands].’
65 On that Day We shall seal up their mouths, but their hands will
speak to Us, and their feet bear witness to everything they have done.
66 If it had been Our will, We could have taken away their sight. They
would have struggled to ﬁnd the way, but how could they have seen
it? 67 If it had been Our will, We could have paralysed them where
they stood, so that they could not move forward or backward. 68 If We
extend anyone’s life, We reverse his development. Do they not use
their reason?

284

The Qur an

36: 69

69 We have not taught the Prophet poetry, a nor could he ever b
have been a poet. 70 This is a revelation, an illuminating Qur an to
warn anyone who is truly alive, so that God’s verdict may be passed
against the disbelievers.
71 Can they not see how, among the things made by Our hands, We
have created livestock they control, 72 and made them obedient, so
that some can be used for riding, some for food, 73 some for other
beneﬁts, and some for drink? Will they not give thanks? 74 Yet they
have taken other gods besides God to help them, 75 though these
could not do so even if they called a whole army of them together!
76 So [Prophet] do not be distressed at what they say: We know what
they conceal and what they reveal.
77 Can man not see that We created him from a drop of ﬂuid?
Yet–– lo and behold!–– he disputes openly, 78 producing arguments
against Us, forgetting his own creation. He says, ‘Who can give life
back to bones after they have decayed?’ 79 Say, ‘He who created them
in the ﬁrst place will give them life again: He has full knowledge of
every act of creation. 80 It is He who produces ﬁre for you out of the
green tree–– lo and behold!–– and from this you kindle ﬁre. 81 Is He
who created the heavens and earth not able to create the likes of these
people? Of course He is! He is the All Knowing Creator: 82 when He
wills something to be, His way is to say, “Be”–– and it is! 83 So glory
be to Him in whose Hand lies control over all things. It is to Him
that you will all be brought back.’
a
b

Some of the Arabs dismissed the Qur an as poetry.
This is a classical meaning of yanbaghi.

37. RANGED IN ROWS a
The central point of this Meccan sura is the unity of God (verses 4 and 180–2)
and the refutation of the pagan belief that the angels were daughters of God
and worthy of worship. The angels themselves are quoted to refute this (verses
164–6). The prophethood of Muhammad, is aﬃrmed, as is the Hereafter.
There are two supporting sections: the scenes in the Hereafter (verses 19–68)
and the stories of earlier prophets (verses 75–148).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By those [angels] ranged in rows, 2 who rebuke reproachfully 3 and
recite God’s word, 4 truly your God is One, 5 Lord of the heavens and
earth and everything between them, Lord of every sunrise. 6 We have
adorned the lowest heaven with stars, 7 and made them a safeguard
against every rebellious devil: 8 they cannot eavesdrop on the Higher
Assembly b ––pelted from every side, 9 driven away, they will have
perpetual torment––10 if any [of them] stealthily snatches away a
fragment, c he will be pursued by a piercing ﬂame.
11 So [Prophet], ask the disbelievers: is it harder to create them
than other beings We have created? d We created them from sticky
clay. 12 You marvel as they scoﬀ, 13 take no heed when they are
warned, 14 and resort to ridicule when they see a sign, 15 saying, ‘This
is no more than blatant sorcery.’ 16 ‘What! After we have died and
become dust and bones, shall we really be raised up again, 17 along
with our forefathers?’ 18 Say, ‘Yes indeed, and you will be humiliated.’ 19 Just one blast and––lo and behold!––they will look 20 and say,
‘Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgement.’ 21 [It will be said], ‘This is
the Day of Decision, which you used to deny. 22 [Angels], gather
together those who did wrong, and others like them, as well as whatever they worshipped 23 beside God, lead them all to the path of Hell,
24 and halt them for questioning: 25 “Why do you not support each
other now?” ’––26 no indeed! They will be in complete submission
on that Day––27 and they will turn on one another accusingly.
a
c

Cf. 37: 165–6; 78: 38.
Of something he overheard.

b
d

Of angels.
Cf. 40: 57.

286

The Qur an

37: 28

28 They will say, ‘You came to us from a position of power.’ a 29 They
will say, ‘No! It was you who would not believe–– 30 we had no power
over you–– and you were already exceeding all limits. 31 Our Lord’s
sentence on us is just and we must all taste the punishment. 32 We led
you astray as we ourselves were astray.’ 33 On that Day they will all
share the torment: 34 this is how We deal with the guilty. 35 Whenever
it was said to them, ‘There is no deity but God,’ they became arrogant, 36 and said, ‘Are we to forsake our gods for a mad poet?’ 37 ‘No:
he brought the truth and conﬁrmed the earlier messengers; 38 you
will taste the painful torment, 39 and be repaid only according to your
deeds.’
40 Not so God’s true servants. 41 They will have familiar provisions b ––42 fruits–– and will be honoured 43 in gardens of delight;
44 seated on couches, facing one another. 45 A drink will be passed
round among them from a ﬂowing spring: 46 white, delicious to those
who taste it, 47 causing no headiness or intoxication. 48 With them will
be spouses–– modest of gaze and beautiful of eye–– 49 like protected
eggs. c
50 They will turn to one another with questions: 51 one will say, ‘I
had a close companion on earth 52 who used to ask me, “Do you really
believe that 53 after we die and become dust and bone, we shall be
brought for judgement?”’ 54 Then he will say, ‘Shall we look for
him?’ 55 He will look down and see him in the midst of the Fire, 56 and
say to him, ‘By God, you almost brought me to ruin! 57 Had it not
been for the grace of my Lord, I too would have been taken to Hell.’
58 Then he will say [to his blessed companions], ‘Are we never to die
again after our earlier death? 59 Shall we never suﬀer? 60 This truly is
the supreme triumph!’ 61 Everyone should strive to attain this. 62 Is
this the better welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum, 63 which we have
made a test for the evildoers? 64 This tree grows in the heart of the
blazing Fire, d 65 and its fruits are like devils’ heads. 66 They will ﬁll
their bellies eating from it; 67 then drink scalding water on top of it;
a The Arabic expression ‘from the right-hand side’ conveys the meaning of being in
the right or approaching from the most honourable angle, or with power and inﬂuence
(see verse 30).
b See 2: 25.
c Arabs described beautiful women as being as precious as the ostrich eggs they
protected from the dust with feathers.
d The disbelievers said, scornfully, ‘How can there be a tree in the Fire?’

37: 113

Ranged in Rows

287

68 then return to the blazing Fire. 69 They found their forefathers
astray, 70 and rushed to follow in their footsteps–– before the disbelievers [of Mecca], 71 most men in the past went astray, 72 even
though We sent messengers to warn them.73 See how those who were
warned met their end! 74 Not so the true servants of God.
75 Noah cried to Us, and how excellent was Our response! 76 We
saved him and his people from great distress, 77 We let his oﬀspring
remain on the earth, 78 We let him be praised by later generations:
79 ‘Peace be upon Noah among all the nations!’ 80 This is how We
reward those who do good: 81 he was truly one of Our faithful
servants. 82 We drowned the rest.
83 Abraham was of the same faith: 84 he came to his Lord with a
devoted heart. 85 He said to his father and his people, ‘What are you
worshipping? 86 How can you choose false gods instead of the true
God? 87 So what is your opinion about the Lord of all the Worlds?’
88 then he looked up to the stars. 89 He said, ‘I am sick,’ 90 so [his
people] turned away from him and left. 91 He turned to their gods
and said, 92 ‘Do you not eat? Why do you not speak?’ 93 then he
turned and struck them with his right arm. 94 His people hurried
towards him, 95 but he said, ‘How can you worship things you carve
with your own hands, 96 when it is God who has created you and all
your handiwork?’ 97 They said, ‘Build a pyre and throw him into the
blazing ﬁre.’ 98 They wanted to harm him, but We humiliated them.
99 He said, ‘I will go to my Lord: He is sure to guide me. 100 Lord,
grant me a righteous son,’ 101 so We gave him the good news that he
would have a patient son. 102 When the boy was old enough to work
with his father, Abraham said, ‘My son, I have seen myself sacriﬁcing you in a dream. What do you think?’ He said, ‘Father, do as
you are commanded and, God willing, you will ﬁnd me steadfast.’
103 When they had both submitted to God, and he had laid his son
down on the side of his face, 104 We called out to him, ‘Abraham,
105 you have fulﬁlled the dream.’ This is how We reward those who
do good–– 106 it was a test to prove [their true characters]–– 107 We
ransomed his son with a momentous sacriﬁce, 108 and We let him be
praised by succeeding generations: 109 ‘Peace be upon Abraham!’
110 This is how We reward those who do good: 111 truly he was one of
Our faithful servants.
112 We gave Abraham the good news of Isaac–– a prophet and a
righteous man–– 113 and blessed him and Isaac too: some of their

288

The Qur an

37: 114

oﬀspring were good, but some clearly wronged themselves. 114 We
also bestowed Our favour on Moses and Aaron: 115 We saved them
and their people from great distress; 116 We helped them, so they were
the ones to succeed; 117 We gave them the Scripture that makes things
clear; 118 We guided them to the right path; 119 We let them be praised
by succeeding generations: 120 ‘Peace be upon Moses and Aaron!’
121 This is how We reward those who do good: 122 truly they were
among Our faithful servants.
123 Elijah too was one of the messengers. 124 He said to his people,
‘Have you no fear of God? 125 How can you invoke Baal and forsake
the Most Gracious Creator, 126 God, your Lord and the Lord of your
forefathers?’ 127 but they rejected him. They will be brought to punishment a as a consequence; 128 not so the true servants of God. 129 We
let him be praised by succeeding generations: 130 ‘Peace be to Elijah!’
131 This is how We reward those who do good: 132 truly he was one of
Our faithful servants.
133 Lot was also one of the messengers. 134 We saved him and all his
family–– 135 except for an old woman who stayed behind–– 136 and We
destroyed the rest. 137 You [people] pass by their ruins morning
138 and night: will you not take heed? 139 Jonah too was one of the
messengers. 140 He ﬂed to the overloaded ship. 141 They cast lots, he
suﬀered defeat, 142 and a great ﬁsh swallowed him, for he had committed blameworthy acts. 143 If he had not been one of those who
gloriﬁed God, 144 he would have stayed in its belly until the Day when
all are raised up, 145 but We cast him out, sick, on to a barren shore,
146 and made a gourd tree grow above him. 147 We sent him to a
hundred thousand people or more. 148 They believed, so We let them
live out their lives. b
149 Now [Muhammad], ask the disbelievers: is it true that your
Lord has daughters, while they choose sons for themselves? c 150 Did
We create the angels as females while they were watching? 151 No
indeed! It is one of their lies when they say, 152 ‘God has begotten.’
How they lie! 153 Did He truly choose daughters in preference to
sons? 154 What is the matter with you? How do you form your
a It is inaccurate to say ‘brought to account’, since this would apply to everyone,
including the true servants of God.
b One of the classical meanings of matta a is ‘to give long life’.
c The pagan Arabs were ashamed to have daughters themselves, yet attributed
daughters to God.

37: 182

Ranged in Rows

289

judgements? 155 Do you not reﬂect? 156 Do you perhaps have clear
authority? 157 Bring your scriptures, if you are telling the truth.
158 They claim that He has kinship with the jinn, yet the jinn themselves know that they will be brought before Him. 159 God is far
above what they attribute to Him–– 160 the true servants of God do
not do such things–– 161 and neither you nor what you worship 162 can
lure away from God any 163 except those who will burn in Hell.
164 [The angels say], ‘Every single one of us has his appointed place:
165 we are ranged in ranks. 166 We glorify God.’ a
167 [The disbelievers] used to say, 168 ‘If only we had a scripture like
previous people, 169 we would be true servants of God,’ 170 yet now
they reject [the Qur an]. They will soon realize. 171 Our word has
already been given to Our servants the messengers: 172 it is they who
will be helped, 173 and the ones who support b Our cause will be the
winners. 174 So [Prophet] turn away from the disbelievers for a while.
175 Watch them: they will soon see. 176 Do they really wish to hasten
Our punishment? 177 When it descends on their courtyards, how terrible that morning will be for those who were warned! 178 [Prophet],
turn away from the disbelievers for a while. 179 Watch them: they will
soon see. 180 Your Lord, the Lord of Glory, is far above what they
attribute to Him. 181 Peace be upon the messengers 182 and praise be to
God the Lord of all the Worlds.
a
b

This is the rebuke by the angels referred to in verse 2.
In classical Arabic jund means ‘supporters’, not just ‘armies’.

38. SAD
This Meccan sura mentions previous prophets in support and encouragement for
Muhammad, and makes a clear link between the arrogance displayed by
the disbelievers of Mecca, previous generations, and Iblis, the original rebel.
The ﬁrst and last verses assert the truth and nobility of the Qur an.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Sad
By the Qur an with its reminding . . .! a 2 Yet the disbelievers are
steeped in arrogance and hostility. 3 How many generations We have
destroyed before them! They all cried out, once it was too late, for
escape. 4 The disbelievers think it strange that a prophet of their own
people has come to warn them: they say, ‘He is just a lying sorcerer.
5 How can he claim that all the gods are but one God? What an
astonishing thing [to claim]!’ 6 Their leaders depart, saying, ‘Walk
away! Stay faithful to your gods! That is what you must do. 7 We did
not hear any such claim in the last religion: b it is all an invention.
8 Was the message sent only to him out of all of us?’
In fact they doubt My warning; in fact they have not tasted My
punishment yet. 9 Do they possess the treasures of your Lord’s
bounty, the Mighty, the All Giving? 10 Do they control the heavens
and earth and everything between? Let them climb their ropes: c
11 their armed alliance is weak and will be crushed. 12 The people of
Noah,  Ad, and ﬁrmly-supported d Pharaoh rejected their prophets
before them. 13 Thamud, the people of Lot, and the Forest-Dwellers
each formed opposition [against theirs]. 14 They all rejected the messengers and they were deservedly struck by My punishment: 15 all
the disbelievers here are waiting for is a single blast that cannot be
a The complement of this oath is understood to be ‘There is only one God’ (see 50:
1–2).
b An allusion to the Christian Trinity.
c Cf. note to 22: 15.
d Dhu’l-awtad literally means ‘with his pegs’, but is understood here metaphorically,
to indicate something ﬁrmly ﬁxed; cf. its use with reference to mountains in 78: 7.

38: 30

Sad

291

postponed. 16 They say, ‘Our Lord! Advance us our share of punishment before the Day of Reckoning!’ 17 Bear their words patiently
[Prophet].
Remember Our servant David, a man of strength who always
turned to Us: 18 We made the mountains join him in glorifying Us at
sunset and sunrise; 19 and the birds, too, in ﬂocks, all echoed his
praise. 20 We strengthened his kingdom; We gave him wisdom and a
decisive way of speaking. 21 Have you heard the story of the two
litigants who climbed into his private quarters? 22 When they reached
David, he took fright, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid. We are two
litigants, one of whom has wronged the other: judge between us
fairly–– do not be unjust–– and guide us to the right path. 23 This is
my brother. He had ninety-nine ewes and I just the one, and he said,
“Let me take charge of her,” and overpowered me with his words.’
24 David said, ‘He has done you wrong by demanding to add your
ewe to his ﬂock. Many partners treat each other unfairly. Those who
sincerely believe and do good deeds do not do this, but these are very
few.’
[Then] David realized that We had been testing him, a so he asked
his Lord for forgiveness, fell down on his knees, and repented: 25 We
forgave him [his misdeed]. His reward will be nearness to Us, a good
place to return to. 26 ‘David, We have given you mastery over the
land. Judge fairly between people. Do not follow your desires,
lest they divert you from God’s path: those who wander from His
path will have a painful torment because they ignore the Day of
Reckoning.’
27 It was not without purpose that We created the heavens and the
earth and everything in between. That may be what the disbelievers
assume–– how they will suﬀer from the Fire!–– 28 but would We treat
those who believe and do good deeds and those who spread corruption on earth as equal? Would We treat those who are aware of God
and those who recklessly break all bounds in the same way? 29 This is
a blessed Scripture which We sent down to you [Muhammad], for
people to think about its messages, and for those with understanding
to take heed.
30 We gave David Solomon. He was an excellent servant who
a This is allegedly an allusion to David’s acquisition of another man’s wife to add to
his own numerous wives.

292

The Qur an

38: 31

always turned to God. 31 When well-bred light-footed horses were
paraded before him near the close of day, 32 he kept saying, ‘My love
of ﬁne things is part of my remembering my Lord!’ until [the horses]
disappeared from sight–– 33 ‘Bring them back!’ [he said] and started
to stroke their legs and necks. a 34 We certainly tested Solomon,
reducing him to a mere skeleton on his throne. b 35 He turned to Us
and prayed: ‘Lord forgive me! Grant me such power as no one after
me will have–– You are the Most Generous Provider.’ 36 So We gave
him power over the wind, which at his request ran gently wherever
he willed, 37 and the jinn c ––every kind of builder and diver 38 and
others chained in fetters. 39 ‘This is Our gift, so give or withhold as
you wish without account.’ 40 His reward will be nearness to Us, and
a good place to return to.
41 Bring to mind Our servant Job who cried to his Lord, ‘Satan has
aﬄicted me with weariness and suﬀering.’ 42 ‘Stamp your foot! Here
is cool water for you to wash in and drink,’ 43 and We restored his
family to him, with many more like them: a sign of Our mercy and a
lesson to all who understand. 44 ‘Take a small bunch of grass in your
hand, and strike [her] with that so as not to break your oath.’ d We
found him patient in adversity; an excellent servant! He, too, always
turned to God.
45 Remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all men of
strength and vision. 46 We caused them to be devoted to Us e through
their sincere remembrance of the Final Home: 47 with Us they will be
among the elect, the truly good. 48 And remember Our servants
Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhu ’l-Kiﬂ, f each of them truly good. 49 This is a
lesson.
The devout will have a good place to return to: 50 Gardens of
lasting bliss with gates wide open. 51 They will be comfortably

a Some say that the horses distracted Solomon from remembering his Lord and that
he slaughtered the horses in anger at his having forgotten the afternoon prayer.
b According to Razi, quoting linguistic usage in Arabic, this is interpreted to mean
that Solomon became so ill that he was like a walking skeleton.
c See 34: 12–13.
d Qur anic commentators explain that, when his wife blasphemed, Job swore that if he
recovered from his illness, he would beat her with one hundred lashes. When he
recovered, however, he regretted his hasty oath, so God gave him this instruction.
e Alternatively, ‘We made them pure’.
f See note to 21: 85.

38: 85

Sad

293

seated; they will call for abundant fruit and drink; 52 they will have
well-matched [wives] with modest gaze. 53 ‘This is what you are
promised for the Day of Reckoning: 54 Our provision for you will
never end.’
55 But the evildoers will have the worst place to return to: 56 Hell to
burn in, an evil place to stay–– 57 all this will be theirs: let them taste
it–– a scalding, dark, foul ﬂuid, 58 and other such torments. 59 [It
will be said], ‘Here is another crowd of people rushing headlong to
join you.’ [The response will be], ‘They are not welcome! They will
burn in the Fire.’ 60 They will say to them, ‘You are not welcome! It
was you who brought this on us, an evil place to stay,’ 61 adding, ‘Our
Lord, give double punishment to those who brought this upon us.’
62 They will say, ‘Why do we not see those we thought were bad 63 and
took as a laughing-stock? Have our eyes missed them?’ 64 This is how
it will really be: the inhabitants of the Fire will blame one another in
this way.
65 [Prophet] say, ‘I am only here to give warning. There is no god
but God the One, the All Powerful, 66 Lord of the heavens and earth
and everything between, the Almighty, the Most Forgiving.’ 67 Say,
‘This message is a mighty one, 68 yet you ignore it. 69 I have no
knowledge of what those on high discuss: a 70 it is only revealed to me
that I am here to give clear warning.’
71 Your Lord said to the angels, ‘I will create a man from clay.
72 When I have shaped him and breathed from My Spirit into him,
bow down before him.’ 73 The angels all bowed down together, 74 but
not Iblis, who was too proud. He became a rebel. 75 God said, ‘Iblis,
what prevents you from bowing down to the man I have made with
My own hands? Are you too high and mighty?’ 76 Iblis said, ‘I am
better than him: You made me from ﬁre, and him from clay.’ 77 ‘Get
out of here! You are rejected: 78 My rejection will follow you till the
Day of Judgement!’ 79 but Iblis said, ‘My Lord, grant me respite until
the Day when they are raised from the dead,’ 80 so He said, ‘You have
respite 81 till the Appointed Day.’ 82 Iblis said, ‘I swear by Your might!
I will tempt all 83 but Your true servants.’ 84 God said, ‘This is the
truth–– I speak only the truth–– 85 I will ﬁll Hell with you and all
those that follow you.’

a

Cf. 2: 30.

294

The Qur an

38: 86

86 [Prophet], say, ‘I ask no reward from you for this, nor do I claim
to be what I am not: 87 this is only a warning for all people. 88 In time
you will certainly come to know its truth.’

39. THE THRONGS
A Meccan sura, whose title is taken from its concluding verses. The main focus
of the sura is the contrast between those who follow the true faith, and those
who ascribe partners to God. The sura emphasizes that people are free to choose
whether to believe or disbelieve (verse 41), but urges them in the strongest possible
terms to turn to the right path while there is still time to repent (verses 53–61).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 This Scripture is sent down from God the Mighty, the Wise. 2 It is
We who sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the Truth, so
worship God with your total devotion: 3 true devotion is due to God
alone. [As for] those who choose other protectors beside Him, saying, ‘We only worship them because they bring us nearer to God,’
God Himself will judge between them regarding their diﬀerences.
God does not guide any ungrateful liar. 4 God could have chosen any
of His creation He willed for oﬀspring, but He is far above this! He
is the One, the Almighty. 5 He created the heavens and earth for a
true purpose; He wraps the night around the day and the day around
the night; He has subjected the sun and moon to run their courses
for an appointed time; He is truly the Mighty, the Forgiving.
6 He created you all from a single being, from which He made its
mate; He gave you a four kinds of livestock in pairs; b He creates you
in your mothers’ wombs, in one stage after another, in threefold
depths of darkness. Such is God, your Lord; He holds control, there
is no god but Him. How can you turn away? 7 If you are ungrateful,
remember God has no need of you, yet He is not pleased by ingratitude in His servants; if you are grateful, He is pleased [to see] it in
you. No soul will bear another’s burden. You will return to your
Lord in the end and He will inform you of what you have done: He
knows well what is in the depths of [your] hearts.
8 When man suﬀers some aﬄiction, he prays to his Lord and turns
Literally ‘sent down’, i.e. in the Scripture, cf. 6: 142–4.
There has been some confusion over numbering here, leading some translators to
render this passage ‘eight pairs’. In fact, the correct translation is either ‘eight head’ or
‘four pairs’. Cf. 6: 143–4.
a
b

296

The Qur an

39: 9

to Him, but once he has been granted a favour from God, he forgets
the One he had been praying to and sets up rivals to God, to make
others stray from His path. Say, ‘Enjoy your ingratitude for a little
while: you will be one of the inhabitants of the Fire.’ 9 What about
someone who worships devoutly during the night, bowing down,
standing in prayer, ever mindful of the life to come, hoping for his
Lord’s mercy? Say, ‘How can those who know be equal to those
who do not know?’ Only those who have understanding will take
heed.
10 Say, ‘[God says], believing servants, be mindful of your Lord!
Those who do good in this world will have a good reward–– God’s
earth is wide a ––and those who persevere patiently will be given a
full and unstinting reward.’ 11 Say, ‘I have been commanded to serve
God, dedicating my worship entirely to Him. 12 I have been commanded to be the ﬁrst to submit.’ 13 Say, ‘I fear the torment of a
terrible Day if I disobey my Lord.’ 14 Say, ‘It is God I serve, dedicating my worship entirely to Him–– 15 you may serve whatever you
please beside Him.’ Say, ‘The true losers are the ones who will lose
themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection: that is
the most obvious loss. 16 They will have layers of Fire above them and
below.’ This is how God puts fear into His servants: My servants,
beware of Me.
17 There is good news for those who shun the worship of false gods
and turn to God, so [Prophet] give good news to My servants 18 who
listen to what is said and follow what is best. These are the ones God
has guided; these are the people of understanding. 19 What about the
one who has been sentenced to punishment? Can you [Prophet]
rescue those already in the Fire? 20 But those who are mindful of
their Lord will have lofty dwellings built for them, one above the
other, graced with ﬂowing streams. This is a promise from God: God
does not break His promise.
21 Have you not considered that God sends water down from the
sky, guides it along to form springs in the earth, and then, with it,
brings forth vegetation of various colours, which later withers, turns
yellow before your eyes, and is crumbled to dust at His command?
There is truly a reminder in this for those who have understanding.
22 What about the one whose heart God has opened in devotion to
a

See 29: 56–60.

39: 38

The Throngs

297

Him, so that he walks in light from his Lord? Alas for those whose
hearts harden at the mention of God! They have clearly lost their
way. 23 God has sent down the most beautiful of all teachings: a
Scripture that is consistent and draws comparisons; that causes the
skins of those in awe of their Lord to shiver. Then their skins and
their hearts soften at the mention of God: such is God’s guidance.
He guides with it whoever He will; no one can guide those God
leaves to stray.
24 What about the one who will only have his bare face to protect
him from his terrible suﬀering on the Day of Resurrection? It will be
said to the evildoers, ‘Taste what you have earned.’ 25 Others before
them also disbelieved, and the punishment fell on them unawares:
26 God gave them the punishment of disgrace in this world to taste;
the punishment will be even harder in the Hereafter, if only they
knew.
27 In this Qur an, We have put forward all kinds of illustration for
people, so that they may take heed–– 28 an Arabic Qur an, free from
any distortion–– so that people may be mindful. 29 God puts forward
this illustration: can a man who has for his masters several partners
at odds with each other be considered equal to a man devoted wholly
to one master? All praise belongs to God, though most of them do
not know.
30 You [Prophet] will certainly die, and so will they, 31 and, on the
Day of Resurrection, you will dispute with one another in the presence of your Lord. 32 So who could be more wrong than the person
who invents a lie about God and rejects the truth when it comes to
him? Is there not ample punishment for the disbelievers in Hell? 33 It
is the one who brings the truth and the one who accepts it as true
who are mindful of God: 34 they will have everything they wish for
with their Lord. Such is the reward of those who do good: 35 God will
absolve them even of their worst deeds and will reward them
according to their best.
36 Is God not enough for His servant? Yet they threaten you
[Prophet] with those they worship other than Him. If God allows
someone to stray he has no one to guide him; 37 if God guides someone no one can lead him astray. Is God not mighty and capable of
retribution? 38 If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who created the heavens
and earth?’ they are sure to answer, ‘God,’ so say, ‘Consider those you
invoke beside Him: if God wished to harm me, could they undo that

298

The Qur an

39: 39

harm? If God wished to show me mercy, could they withhold that
mercy?’ Say, ‘God is enough for me: all those who trust should put
their trust in Him.’ 39 Say, ‘My people, do whatever is in your
power–– and so will I. You will ﬁnd out 40 who will suﬀer humiliation, a and on whom a lasting torment will descend.’
41 We have sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with the
Truth for people. Whoever follows the guidance does so for his own
beneﬁt, whoever strays away from it does so at his own peril: you are
not in charge of them. 42 God takes the souls of the dead and the
souls of the living while they sleep–– He keeps hold of those whose
death He has ordained and sends the others back until their
appointed time–– there truly are signs in this for those who reﬂect.
43 Yet they take intercessors besides God! Say, ‘Even though these
have no power or understanding?’ 44 Say, ‘All intercession belongs to
God alone; He holds control of the heavens and the earth; in the end
you will all return to Him.’
45 Whenever God is mentioned on His own, the hearts of those
who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink with aversion, but they
rejoice when gods other than Him are mentioned. 46 Say, ‘God! Creator of the heavens and earth! Knower of all that is hidden and all
that is open, You will judge between Your servants regarding their
diﬀerences.’ 47 If the evildoers possessed the earth’s assets twice over
they would oﬀer them to ransom themselves from the terrible suﬀering on the Day of Resurrection: God will show them something they
had not reckoned with, 48 the evil of their deeds will become plain to
them, and they will be overwhelmed by that at which they used to
laugh.
49 When man suﬀers some aﬄiction, he cries out to Us, but when
We favour him with Our blessing, he says, ‘All this has been given to
me because of my knowledge’–– it is only a test, though most of them
do not know it. 50 Those who lived before them said the same. What
they did was of no use to them; 51 they suﬀered its evil eﬀects.
Today’s wrongdoers will also suﬀer the evil eﬀects of their deeds:
they will not escape. 52 Do they not know that God provides abundantly for anyone He will and gives sparingly to anyone He will?
There truly are signs in this for those who believe.
53 Say, ‘[God says], My servants who have harmed yourselves by
a

In this world; the lasting torment will be in the Hereafter.

39: 71

The Throngs

299

your own excess, do not despair of God’s mercy. God forgives all
sins: He is truly the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 54 Turn to
your Lord. Submit to Him before the punishment overtakes you and
you can no longer be helped. 55 Follow the best teaching sent down to
you from your Lord, before the punishment suddenly takes you,
unawares, 56 and your soul says, “Woe is me for having neglected
what is due to God, and having been one of those who scoﬀed!” 57 Or
it says, “If God had guided me, I would have joined the righteous!”
58 Or, faced by punishment, it says, “If only I could have another
chance, I would join those who do good!” 59 No indeed! My messages
came to you and you rejected them: you were arrogant and rejected
the truth.’
60 On the Day of Resurrection, you [Prophet] will see those who
told lies against God, their faces darkened. Is there not ample punishment for the arrogant in Hell? 61 But God will deliver those who
took heed of Him to their place of safety: no harm will touch them,
nor will they grieve. 62 God is the Creator of all things; He has charge
of everything; 63 the keys of the heavens and earth are His. Those
who have rejected the revelations of God will be the losers.
64 Say, ‘Do you order me to worship someone other than God, you
foolish people?’ 65 It has already been revealed to you [Prophet] and
to those before you: ‘If you ascribe any partner to God, all your work
will come to nothing: you will be one if the losers. 66 No!
Worship God alone and be one of those who are grateful to Him.’
67 These people have no grasp of God’s true measure. On the Day of
Resurrection, the whole earth will be in His grip. The heavens will
be rolled up in His right hand–– Glory be to Him! He is far above the
partners they ascribe to Him!–– 68 the Trumpet will be sounded, and
everyone in the heavens and earth will fall down senseless except
those God spares. It will be sounded once again and they will be on
their feet, looking on. 69 The earth will shine with the light of its
Lord; the Record of Deeds will be laid open; the prophets and witnesses will be brought in. Fair judgement will be given between
them: they will not be wronged 70 and every soul will be repaid in full
for what it has done. He knows best what they do.
71 Those who rejected the Truth will be led to Hell in their throngs.
When they arrive, its gates will open and its keepers will say to them,
‘Were you not sent your own messengers to recite the revelations of
your Lord to you and warn you that you would meet this Day?’ and

300

The Qur an

39: 72

they will say, ‘Yes indeed we were.’ But the sentence of punishment
will have been passed against those who rejected the truth. 72 It will be
said, ‘Enter the gates of Hell: there you will remain. How evil is the
abode of the arrogant!’
73 Those who were mindful of their Lord will be led in throngs to
the Garden. When they arrive, they will ﬁnd its gates wide open, and
its keepers will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. You have been good.
Come in: you are here to stay,’ 74 and they will say, ‘Praise be to God
who has kept His promise to us and given us this land as our own.
Now we may live wherever we please in the Garden.’ How excellent
is the reward of those who labour! 75 You [Prophet] will see the angels
surrounding the Throne, glorifying their Lord with praise. True
judgement will have been passed between them, and it will be said,
‘Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.’

40. THE FORGIVER
A Meccan sura with two recurring themes: disputing God’s truth (verses 4,
35, 69) and calling upon Him (verses 14, 49, 50, 60, 65, 73). In the opening
verses God is described as the Forgiver, and the Accepter of repentance, yet
severe in punishment, and this dual aspect is exempliﬁed in the sura. The
central section of the sura deals with the story of Pharaoh and Moses (verses
23–54): the destruction of one and victory of the other are stated in verses 45
and 51. The Prophet is, in his turn, urged to be steadfast and to ignore the
taunts of the disbelievers (verses 55 and 77).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the All
Knowing, 3 Forgiver of sins and Accepter of repentance, severe in
punishment, inﬁnite in bounty. There is no god but Him; to Him is
the ultimate return. 4 It is only the disbelievers who dispute God’s
revelations. [Prophet], do not be dazzled by their movements back
and forth across the land. a 5 Before them the people of Noah rejected
the truth and so did those who formed opposition after them: every
community schemed to destroy its messenger and strove to refute
truth with falsehood; but it was I who destroyed them. How terrible
My punishment was! 6 In this way your Lord’s sentence was passed
against the disbelievers that they would be the inhabitants of the Fire.
7 Those [angels] who carry the Throne and those who surround it
celebrate the praise of their Lord and have faith in Him. They beg
forgiveness for the believers: ‘Our Lord, You embrace all things in
mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who turn to You and follow
Your path. Save them from the pains of Hell 8 and admit them, Lord,
to the lasting Gardens You have promised to them, together with
their righteous ancestors, b spouses, and oﬀspring: You alone are the
Almighty, the All Wise. 9 Protect them from all evil deeds: those You
a

Making wealth by trading.
The word aba includes male and female ancestors. Father and mother
are called abawan.
b

302

The Qur an

40: 10

protect on that Day from [the punishment for] evil deeds will receive
Your mercy–– that is the supreme triumph.’ 10 But those who disbelieved will be told, ‘When you were called to the faith and rejected
it, God’s disgust with you was even greater then than the self-disgust
you feel [today].’ 11 They will say, ‘Our Lord, twice You have caused
us to be lifeless a and twice You have brought us to life. Now we
recognize our sins. Is there any way out?’ 12 [They will be told], ‘This
is all because when God alone was invoked you rejected this, yet
when others were associated with Him you believed [in them].’
Judgement belongs to God the Most High, the Most Great.
13 It is He who shows you [people] His signs and sends water down
from the sky to sustain you, though only those who turn to God will
take heed. 14 So call upon God and dedicate your religion to Him
alone, however hateful this may be to the disbelievers: 15 He is exalted
in rank, the Lord of the Throne. He sends revelations with His
teachings to whichever of His servants He will, in order to warn of
the Day of Meeting, 16 the Day when they will come out and nothing
about them will be concealed from God. ‘Who has control today?’
‘God, the One, the All Powerful. 17 Today each soul will be rewarded
for whatever it has done; today no injustice will be done. God is swift
in reckoning.’
18 Warn them [Prophet] of the ever-approaching Day, when hearts
are at throats, choking them. The evildoer will have no friends, nor
any intercessor to be heeded. 19 God is aware of the most furtive of
glances, and of all that hearts conceal: 20 God will judge with truth,
while those they invoke besides Him will not judge at all. God is the
All Hearing, the All Seeing.
21 Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those
who lived before them met their end? They were stronger than them
and made a more impressive mark on the land, yet God destroyed
them for their sins–– they had no one to defend them against Him––
22 because messengers repeatedly came to them with clear signs and
still they rejected them. God destroyed them: He is truly full of
strength, severe in punishment.
a Literally ‘dead’, leading some commentators to interpret this as referring to one’s
initial death, followed shortly thereafter by a second ‘death’ after questioning in the
grave. The more generally accepted view, however, is that earthly life is both preceded
and succeeded by a state of lifelessness. The two acts of giving life therefore refer to
birth and resurrection.

40: 38

The Forgiver

303

23 We sent Moses with Our signs and clear authority 24 to Pharaoh,
Haman, and Korah and they said, ‘Sorcerer! Liar!’ 25 When he
brought the truth to them from Us, they said, ‘Kill the sons of those
who believe with him; spare only their women’–– the scheming of
those who reject the truth can only go wrong–– 26 and Pharaoh said,
‘Leave me to kill Moses–– let him call upon his Lord!–– for I fear he
may cause you to change your religion, or spread disorder in the
land.’ 27 Moses said, ‘I seek refuge with my Lord and yours from
every tyrant who refuses to believe in the Day of Reckoning.’
28 A secret believer from Pharaoh’s family said, ‘How can you kill a
man just for saying, “My Lord is God”? He has brought you clear
signs from your Lord–– if he is a liar, on his own head be it–– and if he
is truthful, then at least some of what he has threatened will happen
to you. God does not guide any rebellious, outrageous liar. 29 My
people, as masters in the land you have the power today, but who will
help us against God’s might if it comes upon us?’ But Pharaoh said, ‘I
have told you what I think; I am guiding you along the right path.’
30 The believer said, ‘My people, I fear your fate will be the fate of
those others who opposed [their prophets]: 31 the fate of the people
of Noah,  Ad, Thamud, and those who came after them–– God never
wills injustice on His creatures. 32 My people, I fear for you on the
Day you will cry out to one another, 33 the Day you will turn tail
and ﬂee with no one to defend you from God! Whoever God leaves
to stray will have no one to guide him. 34 Joseph came to you before
with clear signs, but you never ceased to doubt the message he
brought you. When he died, you said, “God will not send another
messenger.”’
In this way God leaves the doubting rebels to stray–– 35 those who
dispute God’s messages, with no authority given to them, are doing
something that is loathed by God and by those who believe. In this
way God seals up the heart of every arrogant tyrant. 36 Pharaoh said,
‘Haman, build me a tall tower so that I may reach the ropes a that
lead 37 to the heavens to look for this God of Moses. I am convinced
that he is lying.’ In this way the evil of Pharaoh’s deed was made
alluring to him and he was barred from the right path–– his scheming
led only to ruin.
38 The believer said, ‘My people, follow me! I will guide you to
a

Cf. 22: 15, where sabab has the meaning ‘rope’.

304

The Qur an

40: 39

the right path. 39 My people, the life of this world is only a brief
enjoyment; it is the Hereafter that is the lasting home. 40 Whoever
does evil will be repaid with its like; whoever does good and believes,
be it a man or a woman, will enter Paradise and be provided for
without measure. 41 My people, why do I call you to salvation when
you call me to the Fire? 42 You call me to disbelieve in God and to
associate with Him things of which I have no knowledge; I call you
to the Mighty, the Forgiving One. 43 There is no doubt that what
you call me to serve is not ﬁt to be invoked either in this world or the
Hereafter: our return is to God alone, and it will be the rebels who
will inhabit the Fire. 44 [One Day] you will remember what I am
saying to you now, so I commit my case to God: God is well aware of
His servants.’ 45 So God saved him from the harm they planned.
A terrible punishment engulfed Pharaoh’s people; 46 they will be
brought before the Fire morning and evening. a On the Day the
Hour comes, it will be said, ‘Throw Pharaoh’s people into the worst
torment.’ 47 In the Fire they will quarrel with one another: the weak
will say to the haughty, ‘We were your followers, so can you now
relieve us from some share of the Fire?’ 48 but they will say, ‘We are
all in this together. God has judged between His creatures.’ 49 Those
in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, ‘Ask your Lord to lessen
our suﬀering for one day,’ 50 but they will say, ‘Did your messengers
not come to you with clear evidence of the truth?’ They will say, ‘Yes
they did,’ and the keeper will say, ‘You can plead, then, but the pleas
of disbelievers will always be in vain.’
51 We support Our messengers and the believers, in the present life
and on the Day when witnesses arise. 52 On the Day when excuses
will not proﬁt the evildoers, their fate will be rejection and they will
have the worst of homes. 53 We gave Moses guidance and passed
down the Scripture to the Children of Israel, 54 as a guide and a
reminder to people of understanding. 55 So be patient, Prophet, for
what God has promised is sure to come. Ask forgiveness for your
sins; praise your Lord morning and evening. b 56 As for those who,
with no authority to do so, dispute God’s messages, there is nothing
in their hearts but a thirst for a greatness they will never attain. Seek
refuge in God, for He is the All Hearing, the All Seeing.
a
b

‘Morning and evening’ can convey a sense of ‘all the time’.
See preceding note.

40: 77

The Forgiver

305

57 The creation of the heavens and earth is greater by far than the
creation of mankind, though most people do not know it. 58 The
blind and the sighted are not equal, just as those who believe and do
good works and those who do evil are not equal: how seldom you
reﬂect! 59 The Final Hour is sure to come, without doubt, but most
people do not believe. 60 Your Lord says, ‘Call on Me and I will
answer you; those who are too proud to serve Me will enter Hell
humiliated.’
61 It is God who has given you the night in which to rest and the
day in which to see. God is truly bountiful to people, but most
people do not give thanks. 62 Such is God your Lord, the Creator of
all things: there is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded?
63 This is how deluded those who deny God’s messages are. 64 It is
God who has given you the earth for a dwelling place and the heavens
for a canopy. He shaped you, formed you well, and provided you
with good things. Such is God your Lord, so glory be to Him, the
Lord of the Worlds. 65 He is the Living One and there is no god but
Him, so call on Him, and dedicate your religion entirely to Him.
Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.
66 Say [Prophet], ‘Since clear evidence has come to me from my
Lord I am forbidden to serve those you call upon besides God: I am
commanded to submit to the Lord of the Worlds.’ 67 It is He who
created you from dust, then from a drop of ﬂuid, then from a tiny,
clinging form, then He brought you forth as infants, then He allowed
you to reach maturity, then He let you grow old–– though some of
you die sooner–– and reach your appointed term so that you may
reﬂect. 68 It is He who gives life and death, and when He ordains a
thing, He says only ‘Be’ and it is.
69 [Prophet], do you see how deluded those who dispute God’s
messages are–– 70 those who reject the Scripture and the messages We
have sent through Our messengers? They will ﬁnd out 71 when, with
iron collars and chains around their necks, they are dragged 72 into
scalding water, and then burned in the Fire, 73 and asked, ‘Where
now are those you called upon 74 besides God?’ They will say, ‘They
have abandoned us: those we called upon before were really nothing
at all.’ ‘This is how God lets disbelievers go astray, 75 all because on
earth you revelled in untruth and ran wild. 76 Enter the gates of Hell,
there to remain–– an evil home for the arrogant.’
77 So be patient [Prophet], for God’s promise is sure: whether We

306

The Qur an

40: 78

show you part of what We have promised them a in this life or
whether We take your soul back to Us ﬁrst, it is to Us that they will
be returned. 78 We have sent other messengers before you–– some We
have mentioned to you and some We have not–– and no messenger
could bring about a sign except with God’s permission. When [the
Day] God ordained comes, just judgement will be passed between
them: there and then, those who followed falsehood will be lost.
79 It is God who provides livestock for you, some for riding and
some for your food; 80 you have other beneﬁts in them too. You can
reach any destination you wish on them: they carry you, as ships
carry you [on the sea]. 81 He shows you His signs: which of God’s
signs do you still ignore?
82 Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those
who lived before them met their end? They were more numerous
than them, stronger than them, and made a more impressive mark
on the land, yet what they achieved was of no use to them at all.
83 When messengers came to them with clear signs, they revelled in
the knowledge they had, and so they were engulfed by the very
punishment they mocked: 84 when they saw Our punishment, they
said, ‘We believe in God alone; we reject any partner we ascribed to
Him,’ 85 but believing after seeing Our punishment did not beneﬁt
them at all–– this has always been God’s way of dealing with His
creatures–– there and then the disbelievers were lost.
a

The disbelievers.

41. [VERSES] MADE DISTINCT
This Meccan sura deals with the obduracy of the disbelievers, the truthfulness
of the Qur an, the unity of God, and the inevitability of Resurrection. The title
refers to a term used to describe the Qur an in verse 3 and again in verse
44. The sura makes several references to the senses (verses 5, 20–2, 44) which
the disbelievers shut oﬀ from perceiving the Truth in this world, and which
will then testify against their ‘owners’ on the Day of Resurrection, and it
describes the arrogance displayed by people when all is well, contrasted with
their humility and despair when diﬃculties strike (verses 49–51).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 A revelation from the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy; 3 a
Scripture whose verses are made distinct as a Qur an in Arabic for
people who understand, 4 giving good news and warning. Yet most of
them turn away and so do not hear. 5 They say, ‘Our hearts are
encased against [the faith] you call us to; our ears are heavy; there is a
barrier between us and you. So you do whatever you want, and so
shall we.’ 6 Say [Prophet], ‘I am only a mortal like you, [but] it has
been revealed to me that your God is One. Take the straight path
to Him and seek His forgiveness. Woe to the idolaters, 7 who do not
pay the prescribed alms and refuse to believe in the world to come!
8 Those who believe and do good deeds will have a reward that never
fails.’
9 Say, ‘How can you disregard the One who created the earth in
two Days? a How can you set up other gods as His equals? He is the
Lord of all the worlds!’ 10 He placed solid mountains on it, blessed it,
measured out its varied provisions for all who seek them––all in four
Days. 11 Then He turned to the sky, which was smoke––He said to it
and the earth, ‘Come into being, willingly or not,’ and they said, ‘We
come willingly’––12 and in two Days He formed seven heavens, and
assigned an order to each. We have made the nearest one beautifully
a Commentators include these two days in the four mentioned in verse 10, so that the
total is six days; see 32: 4. God’s Days are not like ours; see 22: 47.

308

The Qur an

41: 13

illuminated and secure. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All
Knowing.
13 If they turn away, say, ‘I have warned you about a blast like the
one which struck  Ad and Thamud: 14 when their messengers came to
them, from all angles, a saying, “Serve no one but God,” they said,
“If our Lord had wished, He would have sent down angels. We do
not believe in the message with which you have been sent.” 15 The
people of  Ad behaved arrogantly throughout the land without any
right, saying, “Who could be stronger than us?” Did they not realize
that God, who created them, was stronger than them?’ They continued to reject Our message, 16 so We let a roaring wind loose on
them for a few disastrous days to make them taste the punishment of
shame in this world; more shameful still will be the punishment of
the life to come, and they will not be helped. 17 As for Thamud, We
gave them guidance but they preferred blindness, so they were
struck by a blast of humiliating punishment for their misdeeds. 18 We
saved those who believed and were mindful of God.
19 On the Day when God’s enemies are gathered up for the Fire
and driven onward, 20 their ears, eyes, and skins will, when they reach
it, testify against them for their misdeeds. 21 They will say to their
skins, ‘Why did you testify against us?’ and their skins will reply,
‘God, who gave speech to everything, has given us speech–– it was
He who created you the ﬁrst time and to Him you have been
returned–– 22 yet you did not try to hide yourselves from your ears,
eyes, and skin to prevent them from testifying against you. You
thought that God did not know about much of what you were doing,
23 so it was the thoughts you entertained about your Lord that led to
your ruin, and you became losers.’ 24 The Fire will still be their home,
even if they resign themselves to patience, and if they pray to be
allowed to make amends, they will not be given permission to do so.
25 We have appointed, for the disbelievers, companions b who make
their past and present seem fair and right to them, but the sentence
has already been passed on them, along with generations of jinn and
men before them: they were losers. 26 The disbelievers say, ‘Do not
listen to this Qur an; drown it in frivolous talk: you may gain the
a Literally ‘from before and from behind’, i.e. using all angles of argument. The
messengers tried every method to persuade their people of the truth of their message.
b See 43: 36; 50: 27 ﬀ.

41: 44

[Verses] Made Distinct

309

upper hand.’ 27 We shall certainly give the disbelievers a taste of
severe punishment. We shall repay them according to their worst
deeds–– 28 that is the reward of the enemies of God–– the Fire will be
their lasting home, a payment for their rejection of Our revelations.
29 The disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, show us those jinn and men
who misled us and we shall trample them underfoot, so that they
may be among the lowest of the low.’ 30 As for those who say, ‘Our
Lord is God,’ and take the straight path towards Him, the angels
come down to them and say, ‘Have no fear or grief, but rejoice in the
good news of Paradise, which you have been promised. 31 We are your
allies in this world and in the world to come, where you will have
everything you desire and ask for 32 as a welcoming gift from the
Most Forgiving, Most Merciful One.’
33 Who speaks better than someone who calls people to God, does
what is right, and says, ‘I am one of those devoted to God’? 34 Good
and evil cannot be equal. [Prophet], repel evil with what is better and
your enemy will become as close as an old and valued friend, 35 but
only those who are steadfast in patience, only those who are blessed
with great righteousness, will attain to such goodness. 36 If a prompting from Satan should stir you, seek refuge with God: He is the All
Hearing and the All Knowing.
37 The night, the day, the sun, the moon, are only a few of His
signs. Do not bow down in worship to the sun or the moon, but bow
down to God who created them, if it is truly Him that you worship.
38 If the disbelievers are too arrogant, [remember, Prophet, that]
those who are with your Lord glorify Him tirelessly night and day.
39 Another of His signs is this: you see the earth lying desolate, but
when We send water down on to it, it stirs and grows. He who gives it
life will certainly give life to the dead. He has power over everything.
40 Those who distort the meaning of Our message are not hidden
from Us. Is he who is hurled into the Fire better, or he who comes
through safely on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you want,
God certainly sees everything you do. 41 Those who reject the Qur an
when it comes to them–– though it is an unassailable Scripture
42 which falsehood cannot touch from any angle, a Revelation
sent down from the Wise One, Worthy of All Praise–– 43 [should
remember that] you [Prophet] are not told anything that the
previous messengers were not told: your Lord is a Lord of forgiveness, but also of painful punishment. 44 If We had made it a foreign

310

The Qur an

41: 45

Qur an, they would have said, ‘If only its verses were clear! What?
Foreign speech to an Arab?’ Say, ‘It is guidance and healing for those
who have faith, but the ears of the disbelievers are heavy, they are
blind to it, it is as if they are being called from a distant place.’ 45 We
gave the Scripture to Moses but disputes arose about it–– if it were
not for a decree that had already been issued from your Lord, they
would already have been judged–– and still they are doubtful and
suspicious of it.
46 Whoever does good does it for his own soul and whoever does
evil does it against his own soul: your Lord is never unjust to His
creatures. 47 Knowledge of the Hour belongs solely to Him and no
crop comes out of its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give
birth, without His knowledge. On the Day He asks them, ‘Where are
My partners?’ they will answer, ‘We admit to You that none of us can
see [them]’: 48 the gods they invoked before will have vanished away;
they will know that there is no escape.
49 Man never tires of asking for good, but if evil touches him he
loses all hope and becomes despondent. 50 Whenever We let him taste
some of Our mercy after he has been aﬄicted, he is sure to say, ‘This
is all my own doing: I do not think the Hour will ever come, but even
if I were to be taken back to my Lord, the best reward would await
me with Him.’ We shall most certainly inform the disbelievers
of what they have done and give them a taste of severe torment.
51 Whenever We are gracious to man, he goes away haughtily, but, as
soon as evil touches him, he turns to prolonged prayer. 52 Say
[Prophet], ‘Have you ever thought, what if this revelation really is
from God and you still reject it? Who could be more astray than
someone who cuts himself oﬀ so far [from God]?’ 53 We shall show
them Our signs in every region of the earth and in themselves, until
it becomes clear to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough that
your Lord witnesses everything? 54 Truly, they doubt that they will
meet their Lord; truly He encompasses a everything.
a This is muhit, a metaphor in Arabic for having full knowledge and full power over
everything.

42. CONSULTATION
A Meccan sura that takes its name from verse 38, where the practice of
consultation (shura) is listed as one characteristic of the Muslim community.
The sura discusses man’s habit of creating division and disharmony in matters
of religion, and God’s all-prevailing power, wisdom, and ﬁnal decision. The
unity of religion is stressed (verse 13) as is the continuity of the prophets (verse
3). The Prophet is reminded that he cannot compel people to believe, that they
will be judged according to their deeds, and that he is only there to deliver the
message. The nature of revelation is described in verses 51–3.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim 2  Ayn Sin Qaf
3 This is how God, the Mighty, the Wise, sends revelation to you
[Prophet] as He did to those before you. 4 All that is in the heavens
and earth belongs to Him: He is the Exalted, the Almighty. 5 The
heavens are almost broken apart from above as the angels proclaim
the praises of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth. God
is indeed the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 6 As for those who
take protectors other than Him, God is watching them; you are not
responsible for them.
7 So We have revealed an Arabic Qur an to you, in order that you
may warn the capital city a and all who live nearby. And warn [especially] about the Day of Gathering, of which there is no doubt, when
some shall be in the Garden and some in the blazing Flame. 8 If God
had so pleased, He could have made them a single community, but
He admits to His mercy whoever He will; the evildoers will have no
one to protect or help them. 9 How can they take protectors other
than Him? God alone is the Protector; He gives life to the dead; He
has power over all things. 10 Whatever you may diﬀer about is for
God to judge. [Say], ‘Such is God, my Lord. In Him I trust and to
Him I turn, 11 the Creator of the heavens and earth.’ He made mates
for you from among yourselves––and for the animals too––so that

a

Literally ‘the mother of cities’, Mecca.

312

The Qur an

42: 12

you may multiply. There is nothing like Him: He is the All Hearing,
the All Seeing. 12 The keys of the heavens and the earth are His;
He provides abundantly or sparingly for whoever He will; He has
full knowledge of all things.
13 In matters of faith, He has laid down for you [people] the same
commandment that He gave Noah, which We have revealed to you
[Muhammad] and which We enjoined on Abraham and Moses and
Jesus: ‘Uphold the faith and do not divide into factions within it’––
what you [Prophet] call upon the idolaters to do is hard for them;
God chooses whoever He pleases for Himself and guides towards
Himself those who turn to Him. 14 They divided, out of rivalry,
only after knowledge had come to them, and, if it had not been for
a decree already passed by your Lord to reprieve them until an
appointed time, they would already have been judged. Those after
them, who inherited the Scripture, are in disquieting doubt about it.
15 So [Prophet] call people to that faith and follow the straight path
as you have been commanded. Do not go by what they desire, but
say, ‘I believe in whatever Scripture God has sent down. I am commanded to bring justice between you. God is our Lord and your
Lord–– to us our deeds and to you yours, so let there be no argument
between us and you–– God will gather us together, and to Him we
shall return.’ 16 As for those who argue about God after He has been
acknowledged, their argument has no weight with their Lord: anger
will fall upon them and agonizing torment awaits them. 17 It is God
who has sent down the Scripture with Truth and the Balance. a How
can you tell? The Last Hour may well be near: 18 those who do not
believe in it seek to hasten it, but the believers stand in awe of it.
They know it to be the Truth; those who argue about the Hour are
far, far astray.
19 God is most subtle towards His creatures; He provides [bountifully] for whoever He will; He is the Powerful, the Almighty. 20 If
anyone desires a harvest in the life to come, We shall increase it for
him; if anyone desires a harvest in this world, We shall give him a
share of it, but in the Hereafter he will have no share. 21 How can they
believe in others who ordain for them things which God has not
sanctioned in the practice of their faith? If it were not for God’s

a

The balance of justice and of nature; cf. verse 27.

42: 36

Consultation

313

decree concerning the ﬁnal Decision, judgement would already
have been made between them. The evildoers will have a grievous
punishment–– 22 you will see them fearful because of what they have
done: punishment is bound to fall on them–– but those who believe
and do good deeds will be in the ﬂowering meadows of the Gardens.
They will have whatever they wish from their Lord: this is the great
bounty; 23 it is of this that God gives good news to His servants who
believe and do good deeds.
Say [Prophet], ‘I ask no reward from you for this, only the aﬀection due to kin.’ a If anyone does good, We shall increase it for him;
God is most forgiving and most appreciative. 24 How can they say,
‘He has invented a lie about God’? If God so willed, He could seal
your heart and blot out lies: God conﬁrms the Truth with His words.
He has full knowledge of what is in the heart–– 25 it is He who accepts
repentance from His servants and pardons bad deeds–– He knows
everything you do. 26 He responds to those who believe and do good
deeds, and gives them more of His bounty; agonizing torment awaits
the disbelievers. 27 If God were to grant His plentiful provision to
[all] His creatures, they would act insolently on earth, but He sends
down in due measure whatever He will, for He is well aware of His
servants and watchful over them: 28 it is He who sends relief through
rain after they have lost hope, and spreads His mercy far and wide.
He is the Protector, Worthy of All Praise.
29 Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and all
the living creatures He has scattered throughout them: He has the
power to gather them all together whenever He will. 30 Whatever
misfortune befalls you [people], it is because of what your own hands
have done–– God forgives much–– 31 you cannot escape Him anywhere
on earth: you have no protector or helper other than God. 32 Among
His signs are the ships, sailing like ﬂoating mountains: 33 if He willed,
He could bring the wind to a standstill and they would lie motionless on the surface of the sea–– there truly are signs in this for anyone
who is steadfast and thankful–– 34 or He could cause them to be
wrecked on account of what their passengers have done–– God
pardons much–– 35 to let those who argue about Our messages know
that there is no escape for them.
36 What you have been given is only the ﬂeeting enjoyment of
a

Or ‘I only do this out of aﬀection for you as kin!’

314

The Qur an

42: 37

this world. Far better and more lasting is what God will give to
those who believe and trust in their Lord; 37 who shun great sins
and gross indecencies; who forgive when they are angry; 38 respond
to their Lord; keep up the prayer; conduct their aﬀairs by mutual
consultation; give to others out of what We have provided for
them; 39 and defend themselves when they are oppressed. 40 Let
harm be requited by an equal harm, though anyone who forgives
and puts things right will have his reward from God Himself–– He
does not like those who do wrong. 41 There is no cause to act
against anyone who defends himself after being wronged, 42 but
there is cause to act against those who oppress people and transgress in the land against all justice–– they will have an agonizing
torment–– 43 though if a person is patient and forgives, this is one of
the greatest things.
44 Anyone God allows to stray will have no one else to protect him:
you [Prophet] will see the wrongdoers, when they face the punishment, exclaiming, ‘Is there any way of going back?’ 45 You will see
them exposed to the Fire, abject in humiliation, glancing furtively,
while those who believed exclaim, ‘The losers are the ones who have
lost themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection.’ Truly
the evildoers will remain in lasting torment; 46 they will have no allies
to help them against God. There is no way [forward] for those God
allows to stray.
47 So [people] respond to your Lord before there comes a Day that
cannot, against God’s will, be averted–– you will have no refuge on
that Day, and no possibility of denying [your sins]. If they still turn
away [remember that] 48 We have not sent you [Prophet] to be their
guardian: your only duty is to deliver the message. When We give man
a taste of Our mercy, he rejoices in it, but if some harm befalls him
on account of what he has done with his own hands, then he is
ungrateful. 49 God has control of the heavens and the earth; He creates whatever He will–– He grants female oﬀspring to whoever He
will, 50 male to whoever He will, or both male and female, and He
makes whoever He will barren: He is all knowing and all powerful.
51 It is not granted to any mortal that God should speak to him
except through revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a
messenger to reveal by His command what He will: He is exalted
and wise. 52 So We have revealed a spirit to you [Prophet] by Our
command: you knew neither the Scripture nor the faith, but We

42: 53

Consultation

315

made it a a light, guiding with it whoever We will of Our servants. You
give guidance to the straight path, 53 the path of God, to whom
belongs all that is in the heavens and earth: truly everything will
return to God.
a

The Scripture or the Qur an.

43. ORNAMENTS OF GOLD
A Meccan sura named after the gold ornaments mentioned in verse 35, and
alluded to again in verse 53: in both instances God is refuting the claim of the
disbelievers that a true prophet would be rich. The fact that the angels are
not God’s daughters but His obedient servants is emphasized again and again
(cf. verses 15–20, 60). Similarly, the idea that Jesus could be the son of God
is clearly denied (verses 57–9).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 By the Scripture that makes things clear, 3 We have made it a Qur an
in Arabic so that you [people] may understand. 4 It is truly exalted in
the Source of Scripture a kept with Us, and full of wisdom.
5 Should We ignore you and turn this revelation away from you
because you are insolent people? 6 We have sent many a prophet to
earlier people 7 and they mocked every one of them, 8 so We have
destroyed mightier people than [the disbelievers of Mecca] and their
example has gone down in history. 9 If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who
created the heavens and earth?’ they are sure to say, ‘They were
created by the Almighty, the All Knowing.’ 10 It is He who smoothed
out the earth for you and traced out routes on it for you to ﬁnd your
way, 11 who sends water down from the sky in due measure––We
resurrect dead land with it, and likewise you will be resurrected from
the grave––12 who created every kind of thing, who gave you ships
and animals to ride on 13 so that you may remember your Lord’s
grace when you are seated on them and say, ‘Glory be to Him who
has given us control over this; we could not have done it by ourselves.
14 Truly it is to our Lord that we are returning.’
15 Yet they assign some of His own servants to Him as oﬀspring! b
Man is clearly ungrateful! 16 Has He taken daughters for Himself and
favoured you with sons? 17 When one of them is given news of the
a Literally ‘mother of Scripture’, identiﬁed with the ‘Preserved Tablet’. Cf. 13: 39;
85: 22.
b The Meccan pagans considered the angels to be daughters of God, yet they were
dismissive of their own daughters.

43: 35

Ornaments of Gold

317

birth of a daughter, such as he so readily ascribes to the Lord of
Mercy, his face grows dark and he is ﬁlled with gloom––
18 ‘Someone who is brought up amongst trinkets, who cannot put
together a clear argument?’ a 19 They consider the angels–– God’s
servants–– to be female. Did they witness their creation? Their claim
will be put on record and they will be questioned about it.
20 They say, ‘If the Lord of Mercy had willed it, we would not have
worshipped them,’ but they do not know that–– they are only guessing–– 21 or have We perhaps given them a book before this one, to
which they hold fast? 22 No indeed! They say, ‘We saw our fathers
following this tradition; we are guided by their footsteps.’ 23 Whenever We sent a messenger before you to warn a township, those
corrupted by wealth said, in the same way, ‘We saw our fathers
following this tradition; we are only following in their footsteps.’
24 The messenger said, ‘Even though I bring you a truer religion than
what you saw your fathers following?’ and they replied, ‘But we do
not believe the message you bring.’ 25 We punished them: think about
how those who rejected the Truth met their end. 26 Abraham said to
his father and his people, ‘I renounce what you worship. 27 I worship
only Him who created me, and it is He who will guide me,’ 28 and he
bequeathed these words to his descendants so that they might return
[to God].
29 I have let these people and their fathers enjoy long lives, and
now I have given them the Truth and a messenger to make things
clear–– 30 yet when the Truth came to them, they said, ‘This is sorcery.
We do not believe in it,’ 31 and they said, ‘Why was this Qur an not
sent down to a distinguished man, from either of the two cities?’ b
32 Are they the ones who share out your Lord’s grace? We are the
ones who give them their share of livelihood in this world and We
have raised some of them above others in rank, so that some may take
others into service: your Lord’s grace is better than anything they
accumulate. 33 If it were not that all mankind might have become a
single nation [of disbelievers], We could have given all those who
disbelieve in the Lord of Mercy houses with roofs of silver, sweeping
staircases to ascend, 34 massive gates, couches to sit on, 35 and golden
ornaments. All of these are mere enjoyments of this life; your Lord
a This was the pre-Islamic opinion. One poet boasted that he was inspired by a male,
rather than a female, shaytan.
b Mecca or Ta if, the two main cities of the region.

318

The Qur an

43: 36

reserves the next life for those who take heed of Him. 36 We assign an
evil one as a comrade for whoever turns away from the revelations of
the Lord of Mercy: 37 evil ones bar people from the right path, even
though they may think they are well guided. 38 When such a person
comes to Us, he will say [to his comrade], ‘If only you had been as far
away from me as east is from west. What an evil comrade!’ 39 [It will
be said to them], ‘You have done wrong. Having partners in punishment will not console you today.’
40 Can you [Prophet] make the deaf hear? Or guide either the blind
or those who are in gross error? 41 Either We shall take you away and
punish them–– indeed We will–– 42 or We shall let you witness the
punishment We threatened them with; We have full power over
them. 43 Hold fast to what has been revealed to you–– you truly are on
the right path–– 44 for it is a reminder a for you and your people: you
will all be questioned. 45 Ask the prophets We sent before you: ‘Did
We ever appoint any gods to be worshipped besides the Lord of
Mercy?’
46 We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his courtiers and he said, ‘I am
truly a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds,’ 47 but when he
presented Our signs to them, they laughed, 48 even though each sign
We showed them was greater than the previous one. We inﬂicted
torment on them so that they might return to the right path. 49 They
said, ‘Sorcerer, call on your Lord for us, by virtue of His pledge to
you: we shall certainly accept guidance,’ 50 but as soon as We relieved
their torment they broke their word. 51 Pharaoh proclaimed to his
people, ‘My people, is the Kingdom of Egypt not mine? And these
rivers that ﬂow at my feet, are they not mine? Do you not see? 52 Am I
not better than this contemptible wretch who can scarcely express
himself ? 53 Why has he not been given any gold bracelets? Why have
no angels come to accompany him?’ 54 In this way he moved his
people to accept and they obeyed him–– they were perverse people.
55 When they provoked Us, We punished and drowned them all:
56 We made them a lesson and an example for later people.
57 When the son of Mary is cited as an example, your people
[Prophet] laugh and jeer, 58 saying, ‘Are our gods b better or him?’––
a

Dhikr can mean ‘renown’ or ‘reminder’:
The angels, whom they worshipped as the daughters of God and superior to Jesus,
whom they considered to be a god worshipped by Christians as the Son of God.
b

43: 82

Ornaments of Gold

319

they cite him only to challenge you: they are a contentious people––
59 but he is only a servant We favoured and made an example for the
Children of Israel: 60 if it had been Our will, We could have made
you angels, a succeeding one another on earth.
61 This [Qur an] gives knowledge of the Hour: b do not doubt it.
Follow Me for this is the right path; 62 do not let Satan hinder you,
for he is your sworn enemy. 63 When Jesus came with clear signs
he said, ‘I have brought you wisdom; I have come to clear up some
of your diﬀerences for you. Be mindful of God and obey me: 64 God
is my Lord and your Lord. Serve Him: this is the straight path.’
65 Yet still the diﬀerent factions among them disagreed–– woe to the
evildoers: they will suﬀer the torment of a grievous day!–– 66 what are
they waiting for but the Hour, which will come upon them suddenly
and take them unawares? 67 On that Day, friends will become each
other’s enemies. Not so the righteous–– 68 ‘My servants, there is no
fear for you today, nor shall you grieve’––69 those who believed in
Our revelations and devoted themselves to Us. 70 ‘Enter Paradise, you
and your spouses: you will be ﬁlled with joy.’ 71 Dishes and goblets of
gold will be passed around them with all that their souls desire and
their eyes delight in. ‘There you will remain: 72 this is the Garden you
are given as your own, because of what you used to do, 73 and there is
abundant fruit in it for you to eat.’ 74 But the evildoers will remain in
Hell’s punishment, 75 from which there is no relief: they will remain
in utter despair. 76 We never wronged them; they were the ones who
did wrong. 77 They will cry, ‘Malik, c if only your Lord would ﬁnish
us oﬀ,’ but he will answer, ‘No! You are here to stay.’ 78 We have
brought you the Truth but most of you despise it.
79 Have these disbelievers thought up some scheme? We too have
been scheming. 80 Do they think We cannot hear their secret talk and
their private counsel? Yes we can: Our messengers are at their sides,
recording everything.
81 Say [Prophet], ‘If the Lord of Mercy [truly] had oﬀspring I
would be the ﬁrst to worship [them], d but–– 82 exalted be the Lord of
a

Just as God was able to create Jesus without a father.
Alternatively, the pronoun hu can also be seen to refer to Jesus: ‘[Jesus] gives
knowledge of the Hour’.
c The angel in charge of Hell.
d Another interpretation is ‘If the Lord of Mercy had a son I would be the ﬁrst to
worship him’ (Razi).
b

320

The Qur an

43: 83

the heavens and earth, the Lord of the Throne–– He is far above
their false descriptions.’ 83 Leave them to wade in deeper and play
about, until they face the Day they have been promised. 84 It is He
who is God in heaven and God on earth; He is the All Wise, the All
Knowing; 85 Exalted is He who has control of the heavens and earth
and everything between them; He has knowledge of the Hour; you
will all be returned to Him. 86 Those gods they invoke besides Him
have no power of intercession, unlike those a who bore witness to the
truth and recognized it. 87 If you [Prophet] ask them who created
them they are sure to say, ‘God,’ so why are they so deluded? 88 The
Prophet has said, ‘My Lord, truly these are people who do not
believe,’ 89 but turn away from them and say, ‘Peace’: they will come
to know.
a

Those who have God’s permission. Cf. 20: 109.

44. SMOKE
A Meccan sura that takes its title from verse 10, which describes a smoke-ﬁlled
day, taken by many to refer to the Day of Judgement. The sura highlights the
mercy that is the Qur an, addresses the obduracy of the powerful and wealthy
oppressors, and draws comparisons between the people of Pharaoh, Tubba , and
the Meccans. The people of Paradise will enjoy heavenly bliss while those who
were mighty in this world will suﬀer the torments of Hell.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 By the Scripture that makes things clear, 3 truly We sent it down on
a blessed night––We have always sent warnings––4 a night when
every matter of wisdom was made distinct 5 at Our command––We
have always sent messages to man––6 as a mercy [Prophet] from your
Lord who sees and knows all, 7 Lord of the heavens and the earth and
everything between––if only you people were ﬁrm believers––8 there
is no god but Him: He gives life and death––He is your Lord and the
Lord of your forefathers––9 yet in [their state of] doubt they take
nothing seriously. a
10 [Prophet], watch out for the Day b when the sky brings forth
clouds of smoke for all to see. 11 It will envelop the people. They will
cry, ‘This is a terrible torment! 12 Lord relieve us from this torment!
We believe!’ 13 How will this [sudden] faith beneﬁt them? When a
prophet came to warn them plainly, 14 they turned their backs on
him, saying, ‘He is tutored! He is possessed!’ 15 We shall hold the
torment back for a while c ––you are sure to return [to Us]––16 and
on the Day We seize [them] mightily We shall exact retribution.

a

Literally ‘in doubt they play’.
Some interpret this as referring to an actual event that occurred in the lifetime of
the Prophet––a drought and famine in Mecca during which hunger caused eyes to mist
over when the suﬀerers looked at the sky––but it seems more likely to refer to the Day
of Judgement.
c If this passage is taken to refer to the Day of Judgement, here the torment is
relieved rather than held back, and the people return to disbelief rather than to God.
b

322

The Qur an

44: 17

17 We tested the people of Pharaoh before them: a noble messenger
was sent to them, 18 saying, ‘Hand the servants of God over to me! I
am a faithful messenger who has been sent to you. 19 Do not consider
yourselves to be above God! I come to you with clear authority. 20 I
seek refuge in my Lord and yours against your insults! a 21 If you do
not believe me, just let me be.’
22 [Moses] cried to his Lord, ‘These people are evildoers!’ 23 [God
replied], ‘Escape in the night with My servants, for you are sure to
be pursued. 24 Leave the sea behind you parted and their army will be
drowned.’ 25 Many a garden and spring they left behind, 26 many a
cornﬁeld and noble building, 27 many a thing in which they had
delighted: 28 We gave these to another people to inherit. 29 Neither
heavens nor earth shed a tear for them, nor were they given any time.
30 We saved the Children of Israel from their degrading suﬀering 31 at
the hands of Pharaoh: he was a tyrant who exceeded all bounds. 32 We
chose them knowingly above others: 33 We gave them revelations in
which there was a clear test.
34 These people here b assert, 35 ‘There is nothing beyond our one
death: we will not be resurrected. 36 Bring back our forefathers, if
what you say is true.’ 37 Are they better than the people of Tubba c
and those who ﬂourished before them? We destroyed them all–– they
were guilty. 38 We were not playing a pointless game when We created
the heavens and earth and everything in between; 39 We created them
for a true purpose, but most people do not comprehend.
40 The Day of Decision is the time appointed for all; 41 a Day when
no friend can take another’s place. 42 No one will receive any help
except for those to whom God shows mercy: He is the Mighty, the
Merciful Lord. 43 The tree of Zaqqum 44 will be food for the sinners:
45 [hot] as molten metal, it boils in their bellies 46 like seething water.
47 ‘Take him! Thrust him into the depths of Hell! 48 Pour scalding
water over his head as punishment!’ 49 ‘Taste this, you powerful,
respected man! 50 This is what you doubted.’ 51 But those mindful of
God will be in a safe place 52 amid Gardens and springs, 53 clothed in
silk and ﬁne brocade, facing one another: 54 so it will be. We shall wed
a One of the meanings of rajama is ‘abuse’ or ‘cast aspersions’; another is ‘to stone’;
another is ‘to expel’.
b The Meccans.
c Honoriﬁc title of the King of Yemen given to a succession of powerful kings who
ruled over southern Arabia in ancient times.

44: 59

Smoke

323

them to maidens with large, dark eyes. 55 Secure and contented, they
will call for every kind of fruit. 56 After the one death they will taste
death no more. God will guard them from the torment of Hell,
57 a bounty from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph.
58 We have made this Qur an easy to understand–– in your own
language [Prophet]–– so that they may take heed. 59 So wait; the
disbelievers too are waiting.

45. KNEELING
A Meccan sura that takes its title from verse 28, where the kneeling posture of
all communities on the Day of Judgement is described. The sura addresses some
of the arguments put forward by those sceptical of the truthfulness of the
Qur an. Emphasis is placed on the signs of God’s existence discernible in nature,
and on the painful punishment that awaits the doubters on the Day of Judgement. The misguided arrogance of the disbelievers (verses 8 and 31) is
contrasted with God’s true greatness (verse 37); references to God’s wisdom
and majesty open and close the sura.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 This Scripture is sent down from God, the Mighty, the Wise.
3 There are signs in the heavens and the earth for those who believe:
4 in the creation of you, in the creatures God scattered on earth, there
are signs for people of sure faith; 5 in the alternation of night and day,
in the rain God provides, sending it down from the sky and reviving
the dead earth with it, and in His shifting of the winds there are
signs for those who use their reason. 6 These are God’s signs that We
recount to you [Prophet, to show] the Truth.
If they deny God and His revelations, what message will they
believe in? 7 Woe to every lying sinful person 8 who hears God’s
revelations being recited to him, yet persists in his arrogance as if he
had never heard them––[Prophet] bring him news of a painful torment!––9 who, if he knows anything about Our revelations, ridicules
it! Such people will have a humiliating torment: 10 Hell lurks behind
them and their gains will not beneﬁt them, nor will those beings they
took as protectors beside God––a tremendous torment awaits them.
11 This is true guidance; those who reject their Lord’s revelations will
have a woeful torment.
12 It is God who subjected the sea for you––ships sail on it by His
command so that you can seek His bounty and give Him thanks––
13 He has subjected all that is in the heavens and the earth for your
beneﬁt, as a gift from Him. There truly are signs in this for those
who reﬂect.

45: 28

Kneeling

325

14 Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear God’s days [of
punishment] a ––He will requite people for what they have done.
15 Whoever does good beneﬁts himself, and whoever does evil harms
himself: you will all be returned to your Lord.
16 We gave scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to the Children of
Israel; We provided them with good things and favoured them above
others; 17 We gave them clear proof in matters [of religion]. They
diﬀered among themselves out of mutual rivalry, only after knowledge came to them: on the Day of Resurrection your Lord will
judge between them regarding their diﬀerences. 18 Now We have set
you [Muhammad] on a clear religious path, so follow it. Do not
follow the desires of those who lack [true] knowledge–– 19 they cannot
help you against God in any way. Wrongdoers only have each other
to protect them; the righteous have God Himself as their protector.
20 This [revelation] is a means of insight for people, a source of
guidance and mercy for those of sure faith.
21 Do those who commit evil deeds really think that We will deal
with them in the same way as those who believe and do righteous
deeds, that they will be alike in their living and their dying? How
badly they judge! 22 God created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose: to reward each soul according to its deeds. They will not be
wronged. 23 [Prophet], consider the one who has taken his own desire
as a god, whom God allows to stray in the face of knowledge, sealing
his ears and heart and covering his eyes–– who can guide such a
person after God [has done this]? Will you [people] not take heed?
24 They say, ‘There is only our life in this world: we die, we live,
nothing but time destroys us.’ They have no knowledge of this;
they only follow guesswork. Their only argument, 25 when Our clear
revelations are recited to them, is to say, ‘Bring back our forefathers
if what you say is true.’ 26 [Prophet], say, ‘It is God who gives you life,
then causes you to die, and then He gathers you all to the Day of
Resurrection of which there is no doubt, though most people do not
comprehend.’
27 Control of everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to
God. When the Hour comes, those who follow falsehood will be
the losers on that Day. 28 You will see every community kneeling.
a ‘God’s days’ (plural) here suggests the days on which God delivers His punishment
in this world, not the Day of Judgement (singular).

326

The Qur an

45: 29

Every community will be summoned to its record: ‘Today you will
be repaid for what you did. 29 Here is Our record that tells the truth
about you: We have been recording everything you do.’ 30 Those who
believed and did good deeds will be admitted by their Lord into His
mercy–– that is the clearest triumph–– 31 but those who disbelieved
[will be asked]: ‘When My revelations were recited to you, were you
not arrogant and persistent in wicked deeds? 32 When it was said to
you, “God’s promise is true: there is no doubt about the Hour,” did
you not reply, “We know nothing of the Hour. This is only conjecture in our opinion. We are not convinced”?’
33 The evil of their actions will [then] become clear to them. The
punishment they mocked will engulf them. 34 It will be said, ‘Today
We shall ignore you just as you ignored your appointment with this
Day. The Fire will be your home and no one will help you, 35 because
you received God’s revelations with ridicule and were deceived by
worldly life.’ They will not be brought out of the Fire on that Day,
nor will they be given the chance to make amends.
36 So praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and earth, Lord of the
worlds. 37 True greatness in the heavens and the earth is rightfully
His: He is the Mighty, the Wise.

46. THE SAND DUNES
A Meccan sura. The title refers to the sand dunes mentioned in verse 21,
where the people of  Ad used to live, and where they were destroyed when they
rejected the warning of their prophet. It reﬂects one of the major themes of this
sura: the inescapable punishment that awaits those who deny the truth and the
Resurrection. Emphasis is placed on the fact that communities more established
than the Meccans’ have been destroyed, and that even the jinn believe in the
Qur an before the disbelievers of Mecca do. Finally, the Prophet is encouraged
to be steadfast and await God’s judgement on the disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Ha Mim
2 This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the Wise. 3 It
was for a true purpose and a speciﬁc term that We created heaven
and earth and everything in between, yet those who deny the truth
ignore the warning they have been given. 4 Say [Prophet], ‘Consider
those you pray to other than God: show me which part of the earth
they created or which share of the heavens they own; bring me a
previous scripture or some vestige of divine knowledge––if what you
say is true.’ 5 Who could be more wrong than a person who calls on
those other than God, those who will not answer him till the Day of
Resurrection, those who are unaware of his prayers, 6 those who,
when all mankind is gathered, will become his enemies and disown
his worship?
7 When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, the
disbelievers say of the Truth that has reached them, ‘This is clearly
sorcery,’ 8 or they say, ‘He has invented it himself.’ Say [Prophet], ‘If
I have really invented it, there is nothing you can do to save me from
God. He knows best what you say amongst yourselves about it;
He is suﬃcient as a witness between me and you; He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’ 9 Say, ‘I am nothing new among God’s
messengers. I do not know what will be done with me or you; I only
follow what is revealed to me; I only warn plainly.’ 10 Say, ‘Have you
thought: what if this Qur an really is from God and you reject it?
What if one of the Children of Israel testiﬁes to its similarity [to

328

The Qur an

46: 11

earlier scripture] and believes in it, and yet you are too proud to
[do the same]? God certainly does not guide evildoers.’
11 Those who disbelieve say of the believers, ‘If there were any good
in this Qur an, they would not have believed in it before we did,’ a
and, since they refuse to be guided by it, they say, ‘This is an ancient
fabrication.’ 12 Yet the scripture of Moses was revealed before it as a
guide and a mercy, and this is a scripture conﬁrming it in the Arabic
language to warn those who do evil and bring good news for those
who do good. 13 For those who say, ‘Our lord is God,’ and then follow
the straight path there is no fear, nor shall they grieve: 14 they are the
people of Paradise, there to remain as a reward for what they were
doing.
15 We have commanded man to be good to his parents: his mother
struggled to carry him and struggled to give birth to him–– his bearing and weaning took a full thirty months. When he has grown to
manhood and reached the age of forty he [may] say, ‘Lord, help me
to be truly grateful for Your favours to me and to my parents; help
me to do good work that pleases You; make my oﬀspring good. I turn
to You; I am one of those who devote themselves to You.’ 16 We
accept from such people the best of what they do and We overlook
their bad deeds. They will be among the people of Paradise–– the
true promise that has been given to them.
17 But some say to their parents, ‘What? Are you really warning me
that I shall be raised alive from my grave, when so many generations
have already passed and gone before me?’ His parents implore God
for help; they say, ‘Alas for you! Believe! God’s promise is true,’ but
still he replies, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables.’ 18 The verdict
has been passed on such people, along with all the communities that
went before them, jinn and human: they are lost. 19 Everyone will be
ranked according to their deeds and God will repay them in full for
what they have done: they will not be wronged. 20 On the Day when
those who deny the truth are brought before the Fire, it will be said
to them, ‘You squandered the good things you were given in your
earthly life, you took your ﬁll of pleasure there, so on this Day a
punishment of shame is yours: you were arrogant on earth without
any right, and exceeded all limits.’
a The disbelievers had particular diﬃculty in accepting the fact that some of those
who believed in Islam were people they considered to be humble riﬀ-raﬀ.

46: 34

The Sand Dunes

329

21 Mention [Hud] of the tribe of  Ad: he warned his people among
the sand dunes–– other warners have come and gone both before and
after him––‘ Worship no one but God: I fear for you, that you will be
punished on a terrible Day,’ 22 but they said, ‘Have you come to turn
us away from our gods? If what you say is true, bring down that
punishment you threaten us with!’ 23 He said, ‘Only God knows
when it will come: I simply convey to you the message I am sent with
but I can see you are an insolent people.’ 24 When they saw a cloud
approaching their valley, they said, ‘This cloud will give us rain!’ ‘No
indeed! It is what you wanted to hasten: a storm-wind bearing a
painful punishment 25 which will destroy everything by its Lord’s
command.’ In the morning there was nothing to see except their
[ruined] dwellings: this is how We repay the guilty.
26 We had established them in a way we have not established you
[people of Mecca]; We gave them hearing, sight, and hearts, yet their
hearing, sight, and hearts were of no use to them, since they denied
God’s revelations. They were overwhelmed by the punishment they
had mocked. 27 We have also destroyed other communities that once
ﬂourished around you–– We had given them various signs so that
they might return to the right way–– 28 so why did their gods not help
them, those they set up as gods besides God to bring them nearer to
Him? No indeed! They failed them utterly: it was all a lie of their
own making.
29 We sent a group of jinn to you [Prophet] to listen to the Qur an.
When they heard it, they said to one another, ‘Be quiet!’ Then when
it was ﬁnished they turned to their community and gave them
warning. 30 They said, ‘Our people, we have been listening to a
Scripture that came after Moses, conﬁrming previous scriptures,
giving guidance to the truth and the straight path. 31 Our people,
respond to the one who calls you to God. Believe in Him: He will
forgive you your sins and protect you from a painful torment.’
32 Those who fail to respond to God’s call cannot escape God’s power
anywhere on earth, nor will they have any protector against Him:
such people have clearly gone far astray.
33 Do the disbelievers not understand that God, who created the
heavens and earth and did not tire in doing so, has the power to
bring the dead back to life? Yes indeed! He has power over everything. 34 On the Day the disbelievers are brought before Hell [it will
be said to them], ‘Is this not real?’ ‘Yes, by our Lord,’ they will reply

330

The Qur an

46: 35

and He will say, ‘Then taste the punishment for having denied the
truth.’
35 Be steadfast [Muhammad], like those messengers of ﬁrm
resolve. a Do not seek to hasten the punishment for the disbelievers:
on the Day they see what they had been warned about, it will seem to
them that they lingered no more than a single hour of a single day [in
this life]. This is a warning. Shall any be destroyed except the
deﬁant?
a Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad are traditionally termed ‘the
messengers of ﬁrm resolve’ for their tenacity in preaching God’s message.

47. MUHAMMAD
A Medinan sura that deals with issues of war, those who try to prevent conversion to Islam and the carrying out of God’s commands (a common theme in the
Medinan suras), and the fate of the hypocrites. It speciﬁcally mentions
the iniquity of those who expelled the Prophet from Mecca, it describes the
futility of the disbelievers’ attempts to oppose God and His Prophet, and it
urges the Muslims to obey God in all matters, lest their good deeds come to
nothing on the Day of Judgement like those of the disbelievers and hypocrites.
It takes its title from the mention of Muhammad’s name in verse 2.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 God will bring to nothing the deeds of those who disbelieve and bar
others from the way of God, 2 but He will overlook the bad deeds of
those who have faith, do good deeds, and believe in what has been
sent down to Muhammad––the truth from their Lord––and He will
put them into a good state. 3 This is because the disbelievers follow
falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. In
this way God shows people their true type.
4 When you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike them in the neck,
and once they are defeated, bind any captives ﬁrmly––later you can
release them by grace a or by ransom––until the toils of war have
ended. That [is the way]. God could have defeated them Himself if
He had willed, but His purpose is to test some of you by means of
others. He will not let the deeds of those who are killed for His cause
come to nothing; 5 He will guide them and put them into a good
state; 6 He will admit them into the Garden He has already made
known to them. 7 You who believe! If you help God, He will help you
and make you stand ﬁrm.
8 As for the disbelievers, how wretched will be their state! God has
brought their deeds to nothing. 9 It is because they hate what God
has sent down that He has caused their deeds to go to waste. 10 Have
they not travelled the earth and seen how those before them met
their end? God destroyed them utterly: a similar fate awaits the
a Commentators highlight the fact that ‘by grace’ is the ﬁrst of the two options given
here, concluding that this is the preferred or recommended course of action.

332

The Qur an

47: 11

disbelievers. 11 That is because God protects the believers while the
disbelievers have no one to protect them: 12 God will admit those who
believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams;
the disbelievers may take their ﬁll of pleasure in this world, and eat
as cattle do, but the Fire will be their home. 13 We have destroyed
many a town stronger than your own [Prophet]–– the town which
[chose to] expel you–– and they had no one to help them.
14 Can those who follow clear proof from their Lord be compared
to those whose foul deeds are made to seem alluring to them, those
who follow their own desires? 15 Here is a picture of the Garden
promised to the pious: rivers of water forever pure, rivers of milk
forever fresh, rivers of wine, a delight for those who drink, rivers of
honey clariﬁed and pure, [all] ﬂow in it; there they will ﬁnd fruit of
every kind; and they will ﬁnd forgiveness from their Lord. How can
this be compared to the fate of those stuck in the Fire, given
boiling water to drink that tears their bowels?
16 Some of these people listen to you [Prophet], but, once they
leave your presence, they sneer at those who have been given
knowledge, saying, ‘What was that he just said?’ These are the ones
whose hearts God has sealed, those who follow their own desires.
17 God has increased the guidance of those who follow the right path,
and given them their awareness [of Him]. 18 What are the disbelievers
waiting for, other than the Hour which will come upon them
unawares? Its signs are already here, but once the Hour has actually
arrived, what use will it be then to take heed? 19 So [Prophet], bear in
mind a that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for your sins
and for the sins of believing men and women. God knows whenever
any of you move, and whenever any of you stay still.
20 Those who believe ask why no sura [about ﬁghting] has been
sent down. Yet when a decisive sura [that mentions ﬁghting] is sent
down, you can see the sick at heart looking at you [Prophet] and
visibly fainting at the prospect of death–– better for them 21 would be
obedience and ﬁtting words; it would also be better for them to be
true to God when the decision to ﬁght has been made. 22 ‘If you turn
away now, could it be that you will go on to spread corruption all
over the land and break your ties of kinship?’ b 23 These are the ones
a

Literally ‘know’.
A reference to the pretext given, by some who refused to ﬁght, that ﬁghting breaks
ties of kinship.
b

47: 38

Muhammad

333

God has rejected, making their ears deaf and their eyes blind. 24 Will
they not contemplate the Qur an? Do they have locks on their hearts?
25 Those who turn on their heels after being shown guidance are
duped and tempted by Satan; 26 they say to those who hate what God
has sent down, ‘We will obey you in some matters’ a ––God knows
their secret schemes.
27 How will they feel when the angels take them in death and beat
their faces and their backs 28 because they practised things that
incurred God’s wrath, and disdained to please Him? He makes their
deeds go to waste.
29 Do the corrupt at heart assume that God will not expose their
malice? 30 We could even point them out to you [Prophet] if We
wished, and then you could identify them by their marks, but you
will know them anyway by the tone of their speech. God knows
everything you [people] do. 31 We shall test you to see which of you
strive your hardest and are steadfast; We shall test the sincerity of
your assertions. 32 Those who disbelieve, bar others from God’s path,
and oppose the Messenger when they have been shown guidance, do
not harm God in any way. He will make their deeds go to waste––
33 believers, obey God and the Messenger: do not let your deeds go to
waste–– 34 God will not forgive those who disbelieve, bar others from
God’s path, and die as disbelievers.
35 So [believers] do not lose heart and cry out for peace. It is you
who have the upper hand: God is with you. He will not begrudge
you the reward for your [good] deeds: 36 the life of this world is only a
game, a pastime, but if you believe and are mindful of God, He will
recompense you. He does not ask you to give up [all] your possessions–– 37 you would be grudging if He were to ask you and press you
for them, and He would bring your ill-will to light–– 38 though now
you are called upon to give [a little] for the sake of God, some of you
are grudging. Whoever is grudging is so only towards himself: God
is the source of wealth and you are the needy ones. He will substitute
other people for you if you turn away, and they will not be like you.
a For instance, they will agree that Muhammad is not a prophet but will not agree to
idol worship or denial of the Resurrection (Razi).

48. TRIUMPH
A Medinan sura that takes its title from verse 1 and makes reference to the
occasion when the Prophet had a vision that he and his followers would be
performing pilgrimage to Mecca (verse 27). They set out, but the Meccans
decided to bar them at Hudaybiyya from reaching the town and sent emissaries
to have discussions with the Prophet. In the end the Prophet signed a treaty that
he and the believers would not enter Mecca that year, but would do so the next
year. Seeing the long-term signiﬁcance of this treaty, in the interests of peace he
agreed to a truce of ten years during which time, if any Meccan went over to his
side, he would return him to the Meccans, but if any of his people went over to
the Meccans, they would not return them. Throughout the sura the Prophet
is assured that this treaty that God has given him is a great breakthrough
(cf. verses 1–3, 18–21, 27). The believers are reassured that their self-restraint
and obedience to the Prophet were inspired by God (verses 4–5, 24–6). The
sura condemns both the hypocrites in Medina (verse 6) and the idolaters of
Mecca (verses 6 and 26) and closes by praising the believers (verse 29).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Truly We have opened up a path to clear triumph for you [Prophet],
2 so that God may forgive you your past and future sins, complete
His grace upon you, guide you to a straight path, 3 and help you
mightily. 4 It was He who made His tranquillity descend into the
hearts of the believers, a to add faith to their faith––the forces of
the heavens and earth belong to God; He is all knowing and all
wise––5 so as to admit believing men and women into Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams, there to remain, absolving their bad
deeds––a great triumph in God’s eyes––6 and to torment the hypocritical and idolatrous men and women who harbour evil thoughts
about God b ––it is they who will be encircled by evil!––who carry the
burden of God’s anger, whom God has rejected and for whom
He has prepared Hell, an evil destination! 7 The forces of heaven
and earth belong to God; He is almighty and all wise. 8 We have sent
you [Prophet] to bring good news and to give warning, 9 so that you
a
b

When they pledged to accept the Prophet’s decision. See verse 18.
See verse 12.

48: 20

Triumph

335

[people] may believe in God and His Messenger, support Him,
honour Him, and praise Him morning and evening.
10 Those who pledge loyalty to you [Prophet] are actually pledging loyalty to God Himself–– God’s hand is placed on theirs a ––and
anyone who breaks his pledge does so to his own detriment: God
will give a great reward to the one who fulﬁls his pledge to Him.
11 The desert Arabs who stayed behind will say to you, ‘We were
busy with our property and our families: ask forgiveness for us,’
but they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say,
‘Whether it is God’s will to do you harm or good, who can intervene
for you?’ No! God is fully aware of everything you [people] do. 12 No!
You thought that the Messenger and the believers would never
return to their families and this thought warmed your hearts. Your
thoughts are evil, for you are corrupt people: 13 We have prepared a
blazing Fire for those who do not believe in God and His Messenger.
14 Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God and He forgives
whoever He will and punishes whoever He will: God is most forgiving and merciful.
15 When you [believers] set oﬀ for somewhere that promises war
gains, those who [previously] stayed behind will say, ‘Let us come
with you.’ They want to change God’s words, but tell them
[Prophet], ‘You may not come with us: God has said this before.’
They will reply, ‘You begrudge us out of jealousy.’ How little they
understand!
16 Tell the desert Arabs who stayed behind, ‘You will be called to
face a people of great might in war and to ﬁght them, unless they
surrender: if you obey, God will reward you well, but if you turn
away, as you have done before, He will punish you heavily–– 17 the
blind, the lame, and the sick will not be blamed.’ God will admit
anyone who obeys Him and His Messenger to Gardens graced
with ﬂowing streams; He will painfully punish anyone who turns
away.
18 God was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance
to you [Prophet] under the tree: He knew what was in their hearts
and so He sent tranquillity down to them and rewarded them with a
speedy triumph 19 and with many future gains. God is mighty and
wise. 20 He has promised you [people] many future gains: He has
a

Loyalty was pledged by everybody placing their right hands on top of the Prophet’s.

336

The Qur an

48: 21

hastened this gain for you. He has held back the hands of hostile
people from you as a sign for the faithful and He will guide you to a
straight path. 21 There are many other gains [to come], over which
you have no power. God has full control over them: God has power
over all things.
22 If the disbelievers had fought against you, they would have
taken ﬂight and found no one to protect or support them: 23 such was
God’s practice in the past and you will ﬁnd no change in God’s
practices. 24 In the valley of Mecca it was He who held their hands
back from you and your hands back from them after He gave you
the advantage over them a ––God sees all that you do. 25 They were
the ones who disbelieved, who barred you from the Sacred Mosque,
and who prevented the oﬀering from reaching its place of sacriﬁce. If
there had not been among them, unknown to you, believing men and
women whom you would have trampled underfoot, inadvertently
incurring guilt on their account–– God brings whoever He will into
His mercy–– if the [believers] had been clearly separated, We would
have inﬂicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers. 26 While the
disbelievers had fury in their hearts–– the fury of ignorance–– God
sent His tranquillity down on to His Messenger and the believers
and made binding on them [their] promise to obey God, b for that
was more appropriate and ﬁtting for them. God has full knowledge
of all things.
27 God has truly fulﬁlled His Messenger’s vision: ‘God willing,
you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque in safety, shavenheaded or with cropped hair, c without fear!’–– God knew what you
did not–– and He has granted you a speedy triumph. 28 It was He who
sent His Messenger, with guidance and the religion of Truth, for him
to show that it is above all [false] religion. God suﬃces as a witness:
29 Muhammad is the Messenger of God.
Those who follow him are harsh towards the disbelievers and
compassionate towards each other. You see them kneeling and
prostrating, seeking God’s bounty and His good pleasure: on their
faces they bear the marks of their prostrations. This is how they are
pictured in the Torah and the Gospel: like a seed that puts forth its
a A detachment of eighty Meccan ﬁghters attacked the Prophet’s camp but were
captured. The Prophet released them after the treaty was signed.
b The promise they made under the tree at Hudaybiyya (see verse 18).
c These are some of the ﬁnal rites of pilgrimage.

48: 29

Triumph

337

shoot, becomes strong, grows thick, and rises on its stem to the
delight of its sowers. So God infuriates the disbelievers through
them; God promises forgiveness and a great reward to those who
believe and do righteous deeds.

49. THE PRIVATE ROOMS
This Medinan sura takes its title from the reference to the Prophet’s private
rooms in verse 4. It guides the believers on how to behave with proper respect
towards their leader (verses 1–5), and with mutual respect and trust towards
each other (verses 9–12). The sura stresses the unity of mankind and God’s
intention that people should live together in harmony (verse 13). It criticizes
the desert Arabs for their presumptuous attitude to their faith and to God
(verses 14–18).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Believers, do not push yourselves forward in the presence of God
and His Messenger––be mindful of God: He hears and knows all––
2 believers, do not raise your voices above the Prophet’s, do not raise
your voice when speaking to him as you do to one another, or your
[good] deeds may be cancelled out without you knowing. 3 It is those
who lower their voices in the presence of God’s Messenger whose
hearts God has proved to be aware––they will have forgiveness, and a
great reward––4 but most of those who shout to you [Prophet] from
outside your private rooms lack understanding. 5 It would have
been better for them if they had waited patiently for you to come out
to them but God is all forgiving and merciful.
6 Believers, if a troublemaker brings you news, check it ﬁrst, in
case you wrong others unwittingly and later regret what you have
done, 7 and be aware that it is God’s Messenger who is among you: in
many matters you would certainly suﬀer if he were to follow your
wishes. God has endeared faith to you and made it beautiful to your
hearts; He has made disbelief, mischief, and disobedience hateful
to you. It is people like this who are rightly guided 8 through God’s
favour and blessing: God is all knowing and all wise.
9 If two groups of the believers ﬁght, you [believers] should try to
reconcile them; if one of them is [clearly] oppressing the other, ﬁght
the oppressors until they submit to God’s command, then make a
just and even-handed reconciliation between the two of them: God
loves those who are even-handed. 10 The believers are brothers, so
make peace between your two brothers and be mindful of God,
so that you may be given mercy.

49: 18

The Private Rooms

339

11 Believers, no one group of men should jeer at another, who may
after all be better than them; no one group of women should jeer at
another, who may after all be better than them; do not speak ill of
one another; do not use oﬀensive nicknames for one another. How
bad it is to be called a mischief-maker a after accepting faith! Those
who do not repent of this behaviour are evildoers. 12 Believers, avoid
making too many assumptions–– some assumptions are sinful–– and
do not spy on one another or speak ill of people behind their backs:
would any of you like to eat the ﬂesh of your dead brother? No, you
would hate it. So be mindful of God: God is ever relenting, most
merciful. 13 People, We created you all from a single man and a single
woman, and made you into races and tribes so that you should
recognize one another. In God’s eyes, the most honoured of you are
the ones most mindful of Him: God is all knowing, all aware. b
14 The desert Arabs say, ‘We have faith.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘You
do not have faith. What you should say instead is, “We have submitted,” for faith has not yet entered your hearts.’ If you obey God
and His Messenger, He will not diminish any of your deeds: He is
most forgiving and most merciful. 15 The true believers are the ones
who have faith in God and His Messenger and leave all doubt
behind, the ones who have struggled with their possessions and their
persons in God’s way: they are the ones who are true. 16 Say, ‘Do you
presume to teach God about your religion, when God knows everything in the heavens and earth, and He has full knowledge of all
things?’ 17 They think they have done you [Prophet] a favour by
submitting. Say, ‘Do not consider your submission a favour to me; it
is God who has done you a favour, by guiding you to faith, if you are
truly sincere.’ 18 God knows the secrets of the heavens and earth: He
sees everything you do.
a Those who cause trouble by doing any of the above actions will have earned the
name of ‘mischief-maker’ (Razi).
b Of people’s true worth and the thoughts they harbour (see also 50: 16).

50. QAF
A Meccan sura which deals predominantly with the Resurrection and the Day
of Judgement. Reference is made to previous generations of disbelievers (verses
12–14), both to warn the disbelievers in Mecca and to reassure the Prophet.
Creation is cited as an indication of God’s ability to bring the dead to life again
(verses 3–11), and emphasis is placed on the powerlessness of man on the Day
of Resurrection (verses 20–30). The sura both opens and closes with mention of
the Qur an.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Qaf
By the glorious Qur an! a 2 But the disbelievers are amazed that a
warner has come from among them and they say, ‘How strange! 3 To
come back [to life] after we have died and become dust? That is too
far-fetched.’ 4 We know very well what the earth takes away from
them: We keep a comprehensive record. 5 But the disbelievers deny
the truth when it comes to them; they are in a state of confusion.
6 Do they not see the sky above them––how We have built and
adorned it, with no rifts in it; 7 how We spread out the earth and put
solid mountains on it, and caused every kind of joyous plant to grow
in it, 8 as a lesson and reminder for every servant who turns to God;
9 and how We send blessed water down from the sky and grow with it
gardens, the harvest grain, 10 and tall palm trees laden with clusters
of dates, 11 as a provision for everyone; how with water We give [new]
life to a land that is dead? This is how the dead will emerge [from
their graves]. 12 The people of Noah disbelieved long before these
disbelievers, as did the people of Rass, Thamud, 13  Ad, Pharaoh,
Lot, 14 the Forest-Dwellers, Tubba : all of these people disbelieved
their messengers, and so My warning was realized.
15 So were We incapable of the ﬁrst creation? No indeed! Yet they
doubt a second creation. 16 We created man––We know what his soul
whispers to him: We are closer to him than his jugular vein––17 with
a That which is sworn––that mankind will be raised from the dead––is omitted but is
evident from the verses that follow (cf. 37: 1; 89: 1–4).

50: 42

Qaf

341

two receptors a set to record, one on his right side and one on his left:
18 he does not utter a single word without an ever-present watcher.
19 The trance of death will bring the Truth with it: ‘This is what
you tried to escape.’
20 The Trumpet will be sounded: ‘This is the Day [you were]
warned of.’ 21 Each person will arrive attended by an [angel] to drive
him on and another to bear witness: 22 ‘You paid no attention to
this [Day]; but today We have removed your veil and your sight is
sharp.’ 23 The person’s attendant will say, ‘Here is what I have prepared’–– 24 ‘Hurl b every obstinate disbeliever into Hell, 25 everyone
who hindered good, was aggressive, caused others to doubt, 26 and set
up other gods alongside God. Hurl him into severe punishment!’––
27 and his [evil] c companion will say, ‘Lord, I did not make him
transgress; he had already gone far astray himself.’ 28 God will say,
‘Do not argue in My presence. I sent you a warning 29 and My word
cannot be changed: I am not unjust to any creature.’ 30 We shall say to
Hell on that day, ‘Are you full?’ and it will reply, ‘Are there no more?’
31 But Paradise will be brought close to the righteous and will no
longer be distant: 32 ‘This is what you were promised––this is for
everyone who turned often to God and kept Him in mind, 33 who
held the Most Gracious in awe, though He is unseen, who comes
before Him with a heart turned to Him in devotion–– 34 so enter it in
peace. This is the Day of everlasting Life.’ 35 They will have all that
they wish for there, and We have more for them.
36 We have destroyed even mightier generations before these
disbelievers, who travelled through [many] lands–– was there any
escape? 37 There truly is a reminder in this for whoever has a heart,
whoever listens attentively. 38 We created the heavens, the earth, and
everything between, in six Days without tiring. 39 So [Prophet], bear
everything they say with patience; celebrate the praise of your Lord
before the rising and setting of the sun; 40 proclaim His praise in the
night and at the end of every prayer; d 41 listen out for the Day when
the caller will call from a nearby place. 42 They will come out [from
a

Usually taken to mean ‘recording angels’.
This verb is in the dual, taken to be addressed either to both recording angels, or to
two of the angels who guard Hell.
c Cf. 4: 38; 41: 25.
d Literally ‘prostration’, sujud. This is a ﬁgure of speech in which the part stands for the
whole.
b

342

The Qur an

50: 43

their graves] on that Day, the Day when they hear the mighty blast in
reality. 43 It is We who give life and death; the ﬁnal return will be to
Us 44 on the Day when the earth will be torn apart, letting them rush
out–– that gathering will be easy for Us. 45 We know best what the
disbelievers say. You [Prophet] are not there to force them, so
remind, with this Qur an, those who fear My warning.

51. SCATTERING [WINDS]
A Meccan sura that gives several of the signs of nature as proof of the
Resurrection, among them the scattering winds that give the sura its title
(verse 1). The disbelievers are reminded of the fate that befell previous rebellious
generations and the Prophet is urged to carry on reminding.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By those [winds] that scatter far and wide, a 2 and those that are
heavily laden, b 3 that speed freely, 4 that distribute [rain] as ordained!
5 What you [people] are promised is true: 6 the Judgement will
come––7 by the sky with its pathways, 8 you diﬀer in what you say––
9 those who turn away from it c are [truly] deceived. 10 Perish the liars,
11 those steeped in error and unaware! 12 They ask, ‘When is this
Judgement Day coming?’ 13 On a Day when they will be punished by
the Fire, 14 ‘Taste the punishment! This is what you wished to
hasten.’ 15 The righteous will be in Gardens with [ﬂowing] springs.
16 They will receive their Lord’s gifts because of the good they did
before: 17 sleeping only little at night, 18 praying at dawn for God’s
forgiveness, 19 giving a rightful share of their wealth to the beggar
and the deprived. 20 On earth there are signs for those with sure
faith––21 and in yourselves too, do you not see?––22 in the sky is your
sustenance and all that you are promised. d 23 By the Lord of the
heavens and earth! All this is as real as your speaking.
24 [Muhammad], have you heard the story of the honoured guests
of Abraham? 25 They went in to see him and said, ‘Peace.’ ‘Peace,’
he said, [adding to himself] ‘These people are strangers.’ 26 He
turned quickly to his household, brought out a fat calf, 27 and
placed it before them. ‘Will you not eat?’ he said, 28 beginning to be
afraid of them, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid.’ They gave him good
news of a son who would be gifted with knowledge. 29 His wife then
entered with a loud cry, struck her face, e and said, ‘A barren old
See 15: 22; this is a benevolent scattering (unlike the one in 18: 45).
c Judgement.
With rain.
d The punishment and Final Judgement/Destiny/physical and spiritual sustenance.
e In her incredulity and embarrassment.
a
b

344

The Qur an

51: 30

woman?’ a 30 but they said, ‘It will be so. This is what your Lord said,
and He is the Wise, the All Knowing.’ 31 Abraham said, ‘What is your
errand, messengers?’ 32 They said, ‘We are sent to a people lost in sin,
33 to bring down rocks of clay, 34 marked by your Lord for those who
exceed all bounds.’ 35 We brought out such believers as were there––
36 We found only one household devoted to God–– 37 and left the town
to be a sign for those who fear the painful punishment.
38 There is another sign in Moses: We sent him to Pharaoh with
clear authority. 39 Pharaoh turned away with his supporters, saying,
‘This is a sorcerer, or maybe a madman,’ 40 so We seized him and his
forces and threw them into the sea: he was to blame. 41 There is
another sign in the  Ad: We sent the life-destroying wind against
them 42 and it reduced everything it came up against to shreds. 43 And
also in the Thamud: it was said to them, ‘Make the most of your lives
for a while,’ 44 but they rebelled against their Lord’s command, so the
blast took them. They looked on helplessly: 45 they could not even
remain standing, let alone defend themselves. 46 Before that We destroyed the people of Noah. They were a truly sinful people! 47 We
built the heavens with Our power and made them vast, 48 We spread
out the earth–– how well We smoothed it out!–– 49 and We created
pairs of all things so that you [people] might take note.
50 [So, say to them, Prophet], ‘Quickly, turn to God–– I am sent by
Him to give you clear warning–– 51 and do not set up any other god
alongside Him. I am sent by Him to give you clear warning!’ 52 Every
previous people to whom a messenger was sent also said, ‘A sorcerer, or maybe a madman!’ 53 Did they tell one another to do this?
No! They are a people who exceed all bounds, 54 so ignore them
[Prophet]–– you are not to blame–– 55 and go on reminding [people],
it is good for those who believe to be reminded.
56 I created jinn and mankind only to worship Me: 57 I want no
provision from them, nor do I want them to feed Me–– 58 God is the
Provider, the Lord of Power, the Ever Mighty. 59 The evildoers, like
their predecessors, will have a share of punishment–– they need not
ask Me to hasten it–– 60 and woe betide those who deny the truth on
the Day they have been promised.
a

See 11: 72.

52. THE MOUNTAIN
A Meccan sura which addresses many of the arguments put to the Prophet by
the disbelievers of Mecca (verses 29–49). The bliss that will be enjoyed by the
believers is contrasted to the torments of Hell, and the Prophet is urged to bide
his time, to continue to deliver his message, and to wait with conﬁdence for
God’s judgement. God swears by, among other things, Mount Sinai, from which
the sura takes its title, that the Day of Judgement is inevitable.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the mountain, a 2 by a Scripture inscribed 3 in unrolled parchment, 4 by the much-visited House, b 5 by the raised canopy, c 6 by the
ocean ever ﬁlled, 7 [Prophet], your Lord’s punishment is coming––
8 it cannot be put oﬀ––9 on the Day when the sky sways back and
forth 10 and the mountains ﬂoat away. d 11 Woe on that Day to those
who deny the Truth, 12 who amuse themselves with idle chatter: 13 on
that Day they will be thrust into the Fire of Hell. 14 ‘This is the Fire
you used to deny. 15 So is this sorcery? Do you still not see it? 16 Burn
in it––it makes no diﬀerence whether you bear it patiently or not––
you are only being repaid for what you have done.’
17 Those who were mindful of God are in Gardens and in bliss,
18 rejoicing in their Lord’s gifts: He has saved them from the torment
of the Blaze, 19 ‘Eat and drink with healthy enjoyment as a reward for
what you have done.’ 20 They are comfortably seated e on couches
arranged in rows; We pair them with beautiful-eyed maidens; 21 We
unite the believers with their oﬀspring who followed them in faith––
We do not deny them any of the rewards for their deeds: each person
is in pledge for his own deeds––22 We provide them with any fruit or
meat they desire. 23 They pass around a cup which does not lead to
any idle talk or sin. 24 Devoted youths like hidden pearls f wait on
Mount Sinai, see 95: 2; 23: 20.
Understood to refer to the Ka ba in Mecca.
c The sky.
d See 27: 88.
e Ittaka a means ‘to sit, well supported’ (al-Mu jam al-Wasit) (cf. 55: 54, 76).
f The choicest pearls were kept hidden for their protection and only removed from
safekeeping on very special occasions.
a
b

346

The Qur an

52: 25

them. 25 They turn to one another and say, 26 ‘When we were still with
our families [on earth] we used to live in fear––27 God has been
gracious to us and saved us from the torment of intense heat–– 28 We
used to pray to Him: He is the Good, the Merciful One.’ 29 So
[Prophet] remind [people].
By the grace of your Lord [Prophet], you are neither oracle nor
madman. 30 If a they say, ‘He is only a poet: we shall await his fate,’
31 say, ‘Wait if you wish; I too am waiting’–– 32 does their reason really
tell them to do this, or are they simply insolent people? 33 If they say,
‘He has made it up himself ’–– they certainly do not believe–– 34 let
them produce one like it, if what they say is true. 35 Were they created
without any agent? Were they the creators? 36 Did they create the
heavens and the earth? No! They do not have faith. 37 Do they possess your Lord’s treasures or have control over them? 38 Do they have
a ladder to climb, in order to eavesdrop [on Heaven’s secrets]? Let
their eavesdropper produce clear proof. 39 Does God have daughters
while you have sons? b 40 Do you [Prophet] demand a payment from
them that would burden them with debt? 41 Do they have [access to]
the unseen? Could they write it down? 42 Do they think they can
ensnare you? It is the disbelievers who have been ensnared. 43 Do
they really have another god besides God? God is far above anything
they set alongside Him.
44 Even if they saw a piece of heaven falling down on them, c they
would say, ‘Just a heap of clouds,’ 45 so leave them, Prophet, until
they face the Day when they will be thunderstruck, 46 the Day when
their snares will be of no use to them, when they will get no help.
47 Another punishment awaits the evildoers, though most of them do
not realize it. 48 Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement:
you are under Our watchful eye. Celebrate the praise of your Lord
when you rise. 49 Glorify Him at night and at the fading of the stars.
a Eleven verses in this section begin with ‘or’, which is powerful in Arabic argumentation. The Qur an surveys all their arguments, one by one, with equal emphasis. Thus it
uses am (‘or’) which indicates equivalence in Arabic. We have omitted the conjunction.
b This refers to the pagan belief that the angels were the daughters of God and to
their habit of denigrating the birth of their own daughters.
c The Meccans challenged the Prophet to bring the heavens down on them, if he were
truly God’s Messenger. Cf. 17: 92.

53. THE STAR
A Meccan sura that conﬁrms the divine source of the Prophet’s message and
refers to his ascension to heaven during the Night Journey (verses 1–18). The
sura refutes the claims of the disbelievers about the goddesses and the angels
(verses 19–28), and the third paragraph lists several truths about God’s power.
The sura closes with a warning of the imminent Day of Judgement.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the star when it sets! a 2 Your companion b has not strayed; he is
not deluded; 3 he does not speak from his own desire. 4 The Qur an is
nothing less than a revelation that is sent to him. 5 It was taught to
him by [an angel] c with mighty powers 6 and great strength, who
stood 7 on the highest horizon 8 and then approached––coming down
9 until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer––10 and revealed
to God’s servant what He revealed. 11 [The Prophet’s] own heart did
not distort what he saw. 12 Are you going to dispute with him what he
saw with his own eyes? 13 A second time he saw him: 14 by the lote tree
beyond which none may pass d 15 near the Garden of Restfulness,
16 when the tree was covered in nameless [splendour]. e 17 His sight
never wavered, nor was it too bold, 18 and he saw some of the greatest
signs of his Lord.
19 [Disbelievers], consider al-Lat and al- Uzza, 20 and the third
one, Manat f ––21 are you to have the male and He the female? 22 That
would be a most unjust distribution! g ––23 these are nothing but
names you have invented yourselves, you and your forefathers. God
has sent no authority for them. These people merely follow guesswork and the whims of their souls, even though guidance has come
Sirius, which the Meccans worshipped (cf. verses 49 and 6: 76–9).
Muhammad.
c This refers to the Angel Gabriel.
d Cf. 56: 28.
e Something unimaginable, indescribable.
f Names of Arabian pagan goddesses.
g Because the pagan Arabs regarded daughters as a humiliation, the Qur an argues
with them according to their own logic that it was particularly illogical of them to
attribute daughters to God. See also 16: 57–62; 43: 16–20.
a
b

348

The Qur an

53: 24

to them from their Lord. 24 Is man to have everything he wishes for, a
25 when the present life and the life to come belong only to God?
26 There are many angels in heaven whose intercession will be of no
use until God gives permission to those He will, whose words He
will accept. 27 Those who deny the life to come give the angels female
names. 28 They have no knowledge to base this on: they merely follow
guesswork. Guesswork is of no value against the Truth. 29 So
[Prophet] ignore those who turn away from Our revelation, who
want only the life of this world. 30 Their knowledge does not go
beyond that. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and
who follows guidance. 31 Everything in the heavens and earth belongs
to God. He will repay those who do evil according to their deeds, and
reward, with what is best, those who do good. 32 As for those who
avoid grave sins and foul acts, though they may commit small sins,
your Lord is ample in forgiveness. He has been aware of you from
the time He produced you from the earth and from your hiding
places in your mothers’ wombs, so do not assert your own goodness: b
He knows best who is mindful of Him.
33 [Prophet], consider that man who turned away: 34 he only gave a
little and then he stopped. 35 Does he have knowledge of the Unseen?
Can he see [the Hereafter]? 36 Has he not been told what was written
in the Scriptures of Moses 37 and of Abraham, who fulﬁlled his duty:
38 that no soul shall bear the burden of another; 39 that man will only
have what he has worked towards; 40 that his labour will be seen 41 and
that in the end he will be repaid in full for it; 42 that the ﬁnal goal is
your Lord; 43 that it is He who makes people laugh and weep; 44 that it
is He who gives death and life; 45 that He Himself created the two
sexes, male and female, 46 from an ejected drop of sperm; 47 that He
will undertake the second Creation; 48 that it is He who gives wealth
and possessions; 49 that He is the Lord of Sirius; c 50 that it was He
who destroyed, in their entirety, ancient  Ad 51 and Thamud, 52 and
before them the people of Noah who were even more unjust
and insolent; 53 that it was He who brought down the ruined cities
54 and enveloped them in the punishment He ordained for them?
55 Which then of your Lord’s blessings do you d deny?
a The disbelievers claimed that they worshipped their goddesses in order that these
might intercede for them with God, or bring them closer to Him. Cf. 6: 94; 39: 3.
b Cf. 32: 10; 50: 4.
c The star worshipped by the pagan Arabs.
d The man who turned away (verse 33).

53: 62

The Star

349

56 This is a warning just like the warnings sent in former times.
57 The imminent Hour draws near 58 and only God can disclose it.
59 Do you [people] marvel at this? 60 Why do you laugh instead of
weeping? 61 Why do you pay no heed? 62 Bow down before God and
worship.

54. THE MOON
A Meccan sura dealing mainly with the punishment dealt out to previous
generations of disbelievers. These are presented as a warning to the disbelievers
of Mecca, with the refrain ‘Will anyone take heed?’ running throughout the
sura. Finally the treatment of the disbelievers on the Day of Judgement is
contrasted to the everlasting bliss the believers will enjoy. The title is taken from
verse 1 and is a reference to the Day of Resurrection.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 The Hour draws near; the moon is split in two. a
2 Whenever the disbelievers see a sign, they turn away and say,
‘Same old sorcery!’ 3 They reject the truth and follow their own
desires––everything is recorded b ––4 although warning tales that
should have restrained them have come down to them––5 far-reaching
wisdom––but these warnings do not help: 6 so [Prophet] turn away
from them. On the Day the Summoner will summon them to a
horriﬁc event, 7 eyes downcast, they will come out of their graves like
swarming locusts 8 rushing towards the Summoner. The disbelievers
will cry, ‘This is a stern day!’
9 The people of Noah rejected the truth before them: they rejected
Our servant, saying, ‘He is mad!’ Noah was rebuked, 10 and so he
called upon his Lord, ‘I am defeated: help me!’ 11 So We opened the
gates of the sky with torrential water, 12 burst the earth with gushing
springs: the waters met for a preordained purpose.13 We carried him
along on a vessel of planks and nails 14 that ﬂoated under Our
watchful eye, a reward for the one who had been rejected. 15 We have
left this c as a sign: will anyone take heed? 16 How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings! 17 We have made it
easy to learn lessons from the Qur an: will anyone take heed?
a One of the signs of the Day of Judgement. The Arabic uses the past tense, as if that
Day were already here, to help the reader/listener imagine how it will be. Some traditional commentators hold the view that this describes an actual event at the time of the
Prophet, but it clearly refers to the end of the world: cf. the same expression with
reference to the sky, 55: 37; 84: 1.
b Literally ‘ﬁxed’ in the divine records.
c ‘This tale’ or ‘this ship’.

54: 46

The Moon

351

18 The people of  Ad also rejected the truth. How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings! 19 We released a
howling wind against them on a day of terrible disaster; 20 it swept
people away like uprooted palm trunks. 21 How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings! 22 We have made it
easy to learn lessons from the Qur an: will anyone take heed?
23 The people of Thamud also rejected the warnings: 24 they said,
‘What? A man? Why should we follow a lone man from amongst
ourselves? That would be misguided; quite insane! 25 Would a message be given to him alone out of all of us? No, he is an insolent liar!’
26 ‘Tomorrow they will know who is the insolent liar, 27 for We shall
send them a she-camel to test them: so watch them [Salih] and be
patient. 28 Tell them the water is to be shared between them: a each
one should drink in turn.’ 29 But they called their companion, who
took a sword and hamstrung the camel. 30 How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings! 31 We released a
single mighty blast against them and they ended up like a fencemaker’s dry sticks. 32 We have made it easy to learn lessons from the
Qur an: will anyone take heed?
33 The people of Lot rejected the warnings. 34 We released a stonebearing wind against them, all except the family of Lot. We saved
them before dawn 35 as a favour from Us: this is how We reward the
thankful. 36 He warned them of Our onslaught, but they dismissed
the warning–– 37 they even demanded his guests from him–– so We
sealed their eyes––‘ Taste My [terrible] punishment and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings!’–– 38 and early in the morning a punishment
seized them that still remains–– 39 ‘Taste My [terrible] punishment
and [the fulﬁlment of] My warnings!’ 40 We have made it easy to learn
lessons from the Qur an: will anyone take heed?
41 The people of Pharaoh also received warnings. 42 They rejected
all Our signs so We seized them with all Our might and power.
43 ‘Are your disbelievers b any better than these? Were you given an
exemption in the Scripture?’ 44 Do they perhaps say, ‘We are a great
army and we shall be victorious’? 45 Their forces will be routed and
they will turn tail and ﬂee. c 46 But the Hour is their appointed time––
And the she-camel (see 26: 155).
Of Mecca.
c The Prophet repeated this verse at the Battle of Badr.
a
b

352

The Qur an

54: 47

the Hour is more severe and bitter: 47 truly the wicked are misguided
and quite insane a ––48 on the Day when they are dragged on their
faces in Hell. ‘Feel the touch of Hell.’ 49 We have created all things in
due measure; 50 when We ordain something it happens at once, in the
blink of an eye; 51 We have destroyed the likes of you in the past. Will
anyone take heed?
52 Everything they do is noted in their records: 53 every action,
great or small, is recorded. 54 The righteous will live securely among
Gardens and rivers, 55 secure in the presence of an all-powerful
Sovereign.
a

See verse 24 above.

55. THE LORD OF MERCY
A Medinan sura that highlights God’s wonders in this world, describes the end
of the world, and paints an evocative picture of the delights of Paradise. Hell is
brieﬂy contrasted (verses 43–4) with the joys that await the righteous. The
sura is characterized by the refrain ‘Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do
you both deny?’ which runs throughout. The sura divides mankind and jinn
into three classes: the disbelievers (verses 41–5), the best of believers (verses
46–61), and the ordinary believers (verses 62–77).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 It is the Lord of Mercy 2 who taught the Qur an. a 3 He created man
4 and taught him to communicate. b 5 The sun and the moon follow their
calculated courses; 6 the plants and the trees submit c to His designs;
7 He has raised up the sky. He has set the balance 8 so that you may not
exceed in the balance: 9 weigh with justice and do not fall short in
the balance. 10 He set down the Earth for His creatures, 11 with its fruits,
its palm trees with sheathed clusters, 12 its husked grain, its fragrant
plants. 13 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both d deny?
14 He created mankind out of dried clay, like pottery, 15 the jinn out
of smokeless ﬁre. 16 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you
both deny?
17 He is Lord of the two risings and Lord of the two settings. e
18 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
19 He released the two bodies of [fresh and salt] water. They meet,
20 yet there is a barrier between them they do not cross. 21 Which,
then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
22 Pearls come forth from them: large ones, and small, brilliant
ones. f 23 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
One interpretation is that qur an here means ‘to read’, cf. 96: 1.
Bayan (communication) involves both expressing oneself and understanding what
has been expressed by others, including the Qur an, which is called bayan and mubin.
c Sajada means ‘to submit’ and consequently also ‘to bow down’ or ‘to prostrate
oneself ’.
d Mankind and jinn.
e This refers to the rising and setting of the sun and the moon, or, alternatively, their
furthest points of sunrise and sunset in summer and winter.
f See Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an, 170–1.
a
b

354

The Qur an

55: 24

24 His are the moving ships that ﬂoat, high as mountains, on the
sea. 25 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
26 Everyone on earth perishes; 27 all that remains is the Face a of
your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour. 28 Which, then, of your
Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
29 Everyone in heaven and earth entreats Him; every day He is at
work. b 30 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
31 We shall attend to you two huge armies c [of jinn and mankind].
32 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
33 Jinn and mankind, if you can pass beyond the regions of heaven
and earth, then do so: you will not pass without Our authority.
34 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
35 A ﬂash of ﬁre and smoke will be released upon you and no one
will come to your aid. 36 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you
both deny?
37 When the sky is torn apart and turns crimson, like red hide.
38 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
39 On that Day neither mankind nor jinn will be asked about
their sins. 40 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both
deny?
41 The guilty will be known by their mark and will be seized
by their foreheads and their feet. 42 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
43 This is the Hell the guilty deny, 44 but they will go round
between its ﬂames and scalding water. 45 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
46 For those who fear [the time when they will] stand before their
Lord there are two gardens. 47 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
48 With shading branches. 49 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
50 With a pair of ﬂowing springs. 51 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
52 With every kind of fruit in pairs. 53 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur an, ch. 9.
Literally ‘in some matter’. The Prophet was asked, ‘What is this matter?’ He
replied, ‘He forgives a sin or removes a distress.’
c Thaqal is a mighty or heavy army: all their forces.
a
b

55: 78

The Lord of Mercy

355

54 They will sit on couches upholstered with brocade, the fruit
of both gardens within easy reach. 55 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
56 There will be maidens restraining their glances, untouched
beforehand by man or jinn. 57 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
58 Like rubies and brilliant pearls. 59 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
60 Shall the reward of good be anything but good? 61 Which, then,
of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
62 There are two other gardens below these two. a 63 Which, then, of
your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
64 Both of deepest green. 65 Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
66 With a pair of gushing springs. 67 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
68 With fruits–– date palms and pomegranate trees. 69 Which, then,
of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
70 There are good-natured, beautiful maidens. 71 Which, then, of
your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
72 Dark-eyed, sheltered in pavilions. 73 Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
74 Untouched beforehand by man or jinn. 75 Which, then, of your
Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
76 They will all sit on green cushions and ﬁne carpets. 77 Which,
then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny? 78 Blessed is the
name of your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour.
a Paradise exists in two ranks: the higher level for the truly favoured, and this lower
level described for the less exalted pious. This cosmology of hell, lower paradise, upper
paradise is repeated in the following sura: 56: 7–56.

56. THAT WHICH IS COMING
A Meccan sura whose central message is stated in its opening verses, from which
the sura takes its title: the Day of Judgement is inevitable and it will sort
people into the humiliated and the richly rewarded. As in the previous sura,
people are divided into three classes: those brought near to God (the best of the
believers), those on the right (the ordinary believers), and those on the left
(the disbelievers). Ample proof is given of God’s power and consequently His
ability to bring about the Resurrection (verses 57–72).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When that which is coming arrives, 2 no one will be able to deny it
has come, 3 bringing low and raising high. 4 When the earth is shaken
violently 5 and the mountains are ground to powder 6 and turn to
scattered dust, 7 then you will be sorted into three classes. 8 Those on
the Right––what people they are! 9 Those on the Left––what people
they are! 10 And those in front––ahead indeed! 11 For these will be the
ones brought nearest to God 12 in Gardens of Bliss: 13 many from the
past 14 and a few from later generations. 15 On couches of well-woven
cloth 16 they will sit facing each other; 17 everlasting youths will go
round among them 18 with glasses, ﬂagons, and cups of a pure drink
19 that causes no headache or intoxication; 20 [there will be] any fruit
they choose; 21 the meat of any bird they like; 22 and beautiful companions 23 like hidden pearls: 24 a reward for what they used to
do. 25 They will hear no idle or sinful talk there, 26 only clean and
wholesome a speech.
27 Those on the Right, what people they are! 28 They will dwell
amid thornless lote trees 29 and clustered acacia 30 with spreading
shade, 31 constantly ﬂowing water, 32 abundant fruits, 33 unfailing,
unforbidden, 34 with incomparable companions b 35 We have specially
created––36 virginal, 37 loving, of matching age––38 for those on the
Right, 39 many from the past 40 and many from later generations.
41 But those on the Left, what people they are! 42 They will dwell
a
b

Salam is used adjectivally here (Razi). Another interpretation is ‘Peace! Peace!’
Alternatively ‘couches raised high’. See Razi for both these interpretations.

56: 91

That which is Coming

357

amid scorching wind and scalding water 43 in the shadow of black
smoke, 44 neither cool nor refreshing. 45 Before, they overindulged
in luxury 46 and persisted in great sin, 47 always saying, ‘What?
When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we
then be raised up? 48 And our earliest forefathers too?’ 49 Say
[Prophet], ‘The earliest and latest generations 50 will all be gathered
on a predetermined Day 51 and you who have gone astray and
denied the truth 52 will eat from the bitter tree of Zaqqum, 53 ﬁlling
your bellies with it, 54 and drink scalding water, 55 lapping it like
thirsty camels.’ 56 This will be their welcome on the Day of
Judgement.
57 It was We who created you: will you not believe? 58 Consider
[the semen] you eject–– 59 do you create it yourselves or are We the
Creator? 60 We ordained death to be among you. Nothing could stop
Us 61 if We intended to change you and recreate you in a way
unknown to you. 62 You have learned how you were ﬁrst created: will
you not reﬂect? 63 Consider the seeds you sow in the ground–– 64 is it
you who make them grow or We? 65 If We wished, We could turn
your harvest into chaﬀ and leave you to wail, 66 ‘We are burdened
with debt; 67 we are bereft.’ 68 Consider the water you drink–– 69 was it
you who brought it down from the rain-cloud or We? 70 If We
wanted, We could make it bitter: will you not be thankful? 71 Consider the ﬁre you kindle–– 72 is it you who make the wood for it grow
or We? 73 We made it a reminder, and useful to those who kindle it, a
74 so [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the Supreme.
75 I swear by the positions of the stars–– 76 a mighty oath, if you
only knew–– 77 that this is truly a noble Qur an, 78 in a protected
Record 79 that only the puriﬁed can touch, 80 sent down from the
Lord of all being. 81 How can you scorn this statement? 82 And how, in
return for the livelihood you are given, can you deny it? 83 When the
soul of a dying man comes up to his throat 84 while you gaze on––
85 We are nearer to him than you, though you do not see Us–– 86 why,
if you are not to be judged, 87 do you not restore his soul to him, if
what you say is true? 88 If that dying person is one of those who will
be brought near to God, 89 he will have rest, ease, and a Garden of
Bliss; 90 if he is one of those on the Right, 91 [he will hear], ‘Peace be
a This interpretation of muqwin is supported by Razi. The alternatives to ‘those who
kindle it’ are ‘the desert-dwellers’ or ‘the travellers’.

358

The Qur an

56: 92

on you,’ from his companions on the Right; 92 but if he is one of
those who denied the truth and went astray, 93 he will be welcomed
with scalding water. 94 He will burn in Hell.
95 This is the certain truth: 96 [Prophet], glorify the name of your
Lord the Supreme.

57. IRON
A Medinan sura that urges the believers to spend in God’s cause and uphold
justice––the sura takes its title from the iron mentioned in verse 25. The allpervasiveness of God’s power, knowledge, control, and glory is aﬃrmed to
encourage the believers to right action, and the fate of the hypocrites is
described. Previous prophets are mentioned (verses 26–7), especially Noah,
Abraham, and Jesus, showing the response they received. The sura closes with a
reference to the People of the Book.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Everything in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes God––He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2 Control of the heavens and earth belongs to
Him; He gives life and death; He has power over all things. 3 He
is the First and the Last; a the Outer and the Inner; He has
knowledge of all things. 4 It was He who created the heavens and
earth in six Days and then established Himself on the throne. He
knows what enters the earth and what comes out of it; what descends
from the sky and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever you
are; He sees all that you do; 5 control of the heavens and earth
belongs to Him. Everything is brought back to God. 6 He makes
night merge into day and day into night. He knows what is in every
heart.
7 Believe in God and His Messenger, and give out of what He has
made pass down to you: those of you who believe and give will have a
great reward. 8 Why should you not believe in God when the Messenger calls you to believe in your Lord, and He has already made a
pledge b with you, if you have faith? 9 It is He who has sent down clear
revelations to His Servant, so that He may bring you from the
depths of darkness into light; God is truly kind and merciful to you.
10 Why should you not give for God’s cause when God alone will
inherit what is in the heavens and earth? Those who gave and fought
before the triumph c are not like others: they are greater in rank than
a

Theologians add, ‘without a beginning and without an end’.
See 7: 172.
c The surrender of Mecca.

b

360

The Qur an

57: 11

those who gave and fought afterwards. But God has promised a good
reward to all of them: God is fully aware of all that you do.
11 Who will make God a good loan? He will double it for him and
reward him generously. 12 On the Day when you [Prophet] see the
believers, both men and women, with their light streaming out
ahead of them and to their right, [they will be told], ‘The good news
for you today is that there are Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams
where you will stay: that is truly the supreme triumph!’ 13 On the
same Day, the hypocrites, both men and women, will say to the
believers, ‘Wait for us! Let us have some of your light!’ They will be
told, ‘Go back and look for a light.’ A wall with a door will be
erected between them: inside it lies mercy, outside lies torment.
14 The hypocrites will call out to the believers, ‘Were we not with
you?’ They will reply, ‘Yes. But you allowed yourselves to be
tempted, you were hesitant, doubtful, deceived by false hopes
until God’s command came–– the Deceiver tricked you about God.
15 Today no ransom will be accepted from you or from the
disbelievers: your home is the Fire–– that is where you belong–– a
miserable destination!’
16 Is it not time for believers to humble their hearts to the remembrance of God and the Truth that has been revealed, and not to be
like those who received the Scripture before them, whose time was
extended but whose hearts hardened and many of whom were lawbreakers? 17 Remember that God revives the earth after it dies; We
have made Our revelation clear to you so that you may use your
reason. 18 Charitable men and women who make a good loan to God
will have it doubled and have a generous reward. 19 Those who
believe in God and His messengers are the truthful ones who will
bear witness before their Lord: they will have their reward and their
light. But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations are the
inhabitants of Hell. 20 Bear in mind that the present life is just a
game, a diversion, an attraction, a cause of boasting among you, of
rivalry in wealth and children. It is like plants that spring up after the
rain: their growth at ﬁrst delights the sowers, but then you see them
wither away, turn yellow, and become stubble. There is terrible punishment in the next life as well as forgiveness and approval from
God; the life of this world is only an illusory pleasure. 21 So race for
your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the heavens and
earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers:

57: 29

Iron

361

that is God’s bounty, which He bestows on whoever He pleases.
God’s bounty is inﬁnite.
22 No misfortune can happen, either in the earth or in yourselves,
that was not set down in writing before We brought it into being––
that is easy for God–– 23 so you need not grieve for what you miss or
gloat over what you gain. 24 God does not love the conceited,
the boastful, those who are miserly, and who tell other people to be
miserly. If anyone turns away, remember that God is self-suﬃcient
and worthy of praise. 25 We sent Our messengers with clear signs, the
Scripture and the Balance, so that people could uphold justice: We
also sent iron, with its mighty strength and many uses for mankind,
so that God could mark out those who would help Him and His
messengers though they cannot see Him. a Truly God is powerful,
almighty.
26 We sent Noah and Abraham, and gave prophethood and
scripture to their oﬀspring: among them there were some who were
rightly guided, but many were lawbreakers. 27 We sent other messengers to follow in their footsteps. After those We sent Jesus, son of
Mary: We gave him the Gospel and put compassion and mercy into
the hearts of his followers. But monasticism was something they
invented–– We did not ordain it for them–– only to seek b God’s pleasure, and even so, they did not observe it properly. So We gave a
reward to those of them who believed, but many of them were
lawbreakers. 28 Believers, be mindful of God and have faith in His
Messenger: He will give you a double share of His mercy; He will
provide a light to help you walk; He will forgive you–– God is most
forgiving, most merciful. 29 The People of the Book should know that
they have no power over any of God’s grace and that grace is in the
hand of God alone: He gives it to whoever He will. God’s grace is
truly immense.
a
b

This could apply to God or His helpers.
Alternatively, ‘only that they should seek’.

58. THE DISPUTE
A Medinan sura which disallows a speciﬁc pagan divorce practice: the sura
takes its title from the dispute referred to in verse 1 between a wife who had been
divorced in this manner and the Prophet. The sura supports the woman. It goes
on to state that those who oppose God and His messenger, who secretly ally
themselves with Satan, who lie in their oaths and make intrigues against the
Prophet, will be defeated and suﬀer humiliation both in this world and in
the next (verses 5 and 20), while those on God’s side will triumph (verse 22).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 God has heard the words of the woman who disputed with you
[Prophet] about her husband and complained to God: God has heard
what you both had to say. He is all hearing, all seeing. 2 Even if any
of you say to their wives, ‘You are to me like my mother’s back,’ a
they are not their mothers; their only mothers are those who gave
birth to them. What they say is certainly blameworthy and false, but
God is pardoning and forgiving. 3 Those of you who say such a thing
to their wives, then go back on what they have said, must free a slave
before the couple may touch one another again––this is what you are
commanded to do, and God is fully aware of what you do––4 but
anyone who does not have the means should fast continuously for
two months before they touch each other, and anyone unable to do
this should feed sixty needy people. This is so that you may [truly]
have faith in God and His Messenger. These are the bounds set by
God: grievous torment awaits those who ignore them. 5 Those who
oppose God and His Messenger will be brought low, like those
before them: We have revealed clear messages, and humiliating
torment awaits those who ignore them, 6 on the Day when God will
raise everyone and make them aware of what they have done. God
has taken account of it all, though they may have forgotten: He
witnesses everything.
a The pagan Arabs used to separate themselves from their wives by saying, ‘You are
to me like my mother’s back,’ which deprived the wife of her marital rights, yet prevented her from marrying again. Khawla, daughter of Tha laba, against whom such a
form of divorce was pronounced, complained to the Prophet and he said to her, ‘You are
unlawful to him now.’ This revelation came as a result, changing the rule about such
cruel treatment of wives (cf. 33: 4).

58: 14

The Dispute

363

7 Do you not see [Prophet] that God knows everything in the
heavens and earth? There is no secret conversation between three
people where He is not the fourth, nor between ﬁve where He is not
the sixth, nor between less or more than that without Him being
with them, wherever they may be. On the Day of Resurrection, He
will show them what they have done: God truly has full knowledge
of everything. 8 Have you not seen how those who have been forbidden to hold secret conversations go back afterwards and hold them,
and conspire with one another in what is sinful, hostile, and disobedient to the Messenger? When they come to you they greet you
with words God has never used to greet you, and say inwardly, ‘Why
does God not punish us for what we say?’ Hell will be punishment
enough for them: they will burn there–– an evil destination.
9 You who believe, when you converse in secret, do not do so in a
way that is sinful, hostile, and disobedient to the Messenger, but in a
way that is good and mindful [of God]. Be mindful of God, to whom
you will all be gathered. 10 [Any other kind of] secret conversation is
the work of Satan, designed to cause trouble to the believers, though
it cannot harm them in the least unless God permits it. Let the
believers put their trust in God.
11 You who believe, if you are told to make room for one another
in your assemblies, then do so, and God will make room for you,
and if you are told to rise up, do so: God will raise up, by many
degrees, those of you who believe and those who have been given
knowledge: He is fully aware of what you do. 12 You who believe,
when you come to speak privately with the Messenger, oﬀer something in charity before your conversation: that is better for you and
purer. If you do not have the means, God is most forgiving and
merciful.
13 Were you afraid a to give charity before consulting the Prophet?
Since you did not give charity, and God has relented towards you,
you should [at least] observe your prayers, pay the prescribed alms,
and obey God and His Messenger: God is well aware of your actions.
14 Have you not seen [Prophet] those who give their loyalty to
people with whom God is angry? They are neither with you nor with
a Ashfaqtum is in the past tense. There is a lapse of time between verses 12 and 13
during which those who used to plague the Prophet with questions did not come
forward at all, because of having to pay to charity each time. Verse 13 relaxed this
requirement.

364

The Qur an

58: 15

them, and knowingly swear to lies. 15 God has prepared a severe
torment for them: what they do is truly evil. 16 They have used their
oaths to cover up [their false deeds], and barred others from the path
of God. A humiliating torment awaits them–– 17 neither their wealth
nor their children will be of any use to them against God–– they will
be the inhabitants of Hell, where they will remain. 18 On the Day
God raises them all from the dead, they will swear before Him as
they swear before you now, thinking that it will help them. What liars
they are! 19 Satan has gained control over them and made them forget
God. They are on Satan’s side, and Satan’s side will be the losers:
20 those who oppose God and His Messenger will be among the most
humiliated. 21 God has written, ‘I shall most certainly win, I and My
messengers.’ God is powerful and almighty.
22 [Prophet], you will not ﬁnd people who truly believe in God and
the Last Day giving their loyalty to those who oppose God and His
Messenger, even though they may be their fathers, sons, brothers, or
other relations: these are the people in whose hearts God has
inscribed faith, and whom He has strengthened with His spirit. He
will let them enter Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, where they
will stay: God is well pleased with them, and they with Him. They
are on God’s side, and God’s side will be the one to prosper.

59. THE GATHERING [OF FORCES]
A Medinan sura, the bulk of which is taken to refer to the Jewish clan of
Banu al-Nadir, who originally agreed with the Prophet that they would ﬁght
neither for nor against him, yet, after the Meccan defeat of the Muslims in the
Battle of Uhud, made an alliance with the Meccans. They also tried to kill the
Prophet while he was in their area. He asked them to leave and they agreed,
but Ibn Ubayy, the head of the ‘hypocrites’ of Medina, promised them that, if
they fought the Muslims, he and his camp would ﬁght with them (verses 11–
13), and, if they had to leave Medina, he and his camp would leave with
them. Because the Banu al-Nadir had repeatedly broken their agreements,
the Muslims besieged them in Medina (in ah 4/626 ce), Ibn Ubayy did not
keep his promise, and the Banu al-Nadir agreed to leave, some going to Syria
and some to Khaybar. In this sura, God stresses that any gains were His doing
and so should be distributed in accordance with His instructions (verses
6–10). The end of the sura, consequently, emphasizes obedience and awe
towards God (verses 21–4). The sura takes its name from the gathering of
forces in verse 2.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Everything in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes God; He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2 It was He who drove those of the People of the
Book who broke faith a out from their homes at the ﬁrst gathering of
forces––you [believers] never thought they would go, and they themselves thought their fortiﬁcations would protect them against God.
God came up on them from where they least expected and put panic
into their hearts: their homes were destroyed by their own hands,
and the hands of the believers. Learn from this, all of you with
insight! 3 If God had not decreed exile for them, He would have
tormented them [even more severely] in this world. In the Hereafter
they will have the torment of the Fire 4 because they set themselves
against God and His Messenger: God is stern in punishment
towards anyone who sets himself against Him.
5 Whatever you [believers] may have done to [their] palm trees––
cutting them down or leaving them standing on their roots––was
a They were unfaithful to their agreements with the Prophet (see the introduction to
this sura).

366

The Qur an

59: 6

done by God’s leave, so that He might disgrace those who deﬁed Him.
6 You [believers] did not have to spur on your horses or your camels for
whatever gains God turned over to His Messenger from them. God
gives authority to His messengers over whoever He will: God has
power over all things. 7 Whatever gains God has turned over to His
Messenger from the inhabitants of the villages belong to God, the
Messenger, kinsfolk, orphans, the needy, the traveller in need–– this is
so that they do not just circulate among those of you who are rich–– so
accept whatever the Messenger gives you, and abstain from whatever
he forbids you. Be mindful of God: God is severe in punishment.
8 The poor emigrants who were driven from their homes and possessions, who seek God’s favour and approval, those who help God
and His Messenger–– these are the ones who are true–– [shall have a
share]. 9 Those who were already ﬁrmly established in their homes
[in Medina], and ﬁrmly rooted in faith, show love for those who
migrated to them for refuge and harbour no desire in their hearts for
what has been given to them. They give them preference over themselves, even if they too are poor: those who are saved from their own
souls’ greed are truly successful. 10 Those who came after them say,
‘Lord, forgive us our sins and the sins of our brothers who believed
before us, and leave no malice in our hearts towards those who
believe. Lord, You are truly compassionate and merciful.’
11 Have you [Prophet] considered the hypocrites who say to their
fellows, the faithless among the People of the Book, ‘If you are
driven out, we shall go with you–– we would never listen to anyone
who sought to harm you–– and if you are attacked, we shall certainly
come to your aid’? God bears witness that they are in fact liars: 12 if
they are driven out, they will never leave with them; if they are
attacked, they will never help them. Even if they did come to their
aid, they would soon turn tail and ﬂee–– in the end they would have
no help. 13 Fear of you [believers] is more intense in their hearts than
fear of God because they are people devoid of understanding. 14 Even
united they would never ﬁght you, except from within fortiﬁed
strongholds or behind high walls. There is much hostility between
them: you think they are united but their hearts are divided because
they are people devoid of reason. 15 Like those who went just before
them, a they have tasted the result of their conduct and a painful
a This probably refers to the Banu Qaynuqa, another Jewish tribe banished for their
treachery. It could also refer to the pagans at Badr.

59: 24

The Gathering [of Forces]

367

punishment awaits them. 16 Like Satan, who says to man, ‘Do not
believe!’ but when man disbelieves, says, ‘I disown you; I fear God,
the Lord of the Worlds,’ 17 both will end up in the Fire, there to
remain. That is the reward of evildoers.
18 You who believe! Be mindful of God, and let every soul consider
carefully what it sends ahead for tomorrow; be mindful of God, for
God is well aware of everything you do. 19 Do not be like those who
forget God, so God causes them to forget their own souls: they are
the rebellious ones–– 20 there is no comparison between the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise–– and the inhabitants
of Paradise are the successful ones. 21 If We had sent this Qur an
down to a mountain, you [Prophet] would have seen it humbled and
split apart in its awe of God: We oﬀer people such illustrations so
that they may reﬂect.
22 He is God: there is no god other than Him. It is He who knows
what is hidden as well as what is in the open, He is the Lord of
Mercy, the Giver of Mercy. 23 He is God: there is no god other than
Him, the Controller, a the Holy One, Source of Peace, Granter of
Security, Guardian over all, the Almighty, the Compeller, the Truly
Great; God is far above anything they consider to be His partner.
24 He is God: the Creator, the Originator, the Shaper. The best names
belong to Him. Everything in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes Him:
He is the Almighty, the Wise.
a

Or King/Sovereign.

60. WOMEN TESTED
A Medinan sura, revealed between the Treaty of Hudaybiyya and the conquest
of Mecca, which takes its title from verse 10: instructions are given on how to
deal with women who leave Mecca and join the Muslims, and the procedure for
wives who leave Medina for Mecca (verses 10–11). The Muslims are instructed
on the appropriate allocation of their loyalties (verses 1–3, 7–9, 13) and
Abraham is cited for them as an example to learn from (verses 4–6).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 You who believe, do not take My enemies and yours as your allies,
showing them friendship when they have rejected the truth you have
received, and have driven you and the Messenger out simply because
you believe in God, your Lord a ––not if you truly emigrated in
order to strive for My cause and seek My good pleasure. You secretly
show them friendship––I know all you conceal and all you reveal––
but any of you who do this are straying from the right path. 2 If they
gain the upper hand over you, they will revert to being your enemies
and stretch out their hands and tongues to harm you; it is their
dearest wish that you may renounce your faith.
3 Neither your kinsfolk nor your children will be any use to you on
the Day of Resurrection: He will separate you out. God sees everything you do. 4 You have a good example in Abraham and his companions, when they said to their people, ‘We disown you and what
you worship besides God! We renounce you! Until you believe in
God alone, the enmity and hatred that has arisen between us will
endure!’––except when Abraham said to his father, ‘I will pray for
forgiveness for you though I cannot protect you from God’––[they
prayed] 5 ‘Lord, we have put our trust in You; we turn to You; You
are our ﬁnal destination. Lord, do not expose us to mistreatment [at
the hands of] the disbelievers. Forgive us, Lord, for You are the
a A Muslim in Medina, Hatib bin Abi Balta a, who had family and property in
Mecca, sent a secret letter to the Meccan leaders telling them that the Prophet was
preparing to march on their town, and warning them to take precautions. The letter was
intercepted, and when the Prophet asked him to explain his action, he said that he only
wanted the Meccans to protect his family and property.

60: 13

Women Tested

369

Almighty, the All Wise.’ 6 Truly, they are a good example for you
[believers] to follow, a good example for those who fear God and the
Last Day. If anyone turns away, [remember] God is self-suﬃcing and
worthy of all praise.
7 God may still bring about aﬀection between you and your present enemies–– God is all powerful, God is most forgiving and merciful–– 8 and He does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with
anyone who has not fought you for your faith or driven you out of
your homes: God loves the just. 9 But God forbids you to take as
allies those who have fought against you for your faith, driven you
out of your homes, and helped others to drive you out: any of you
who take them as allies will truly be wrongdoers.
10 You who believe, test the believing women when they come to
you as emigrants–– God knows best about their faith–– and if you are
sure of their belief, do not send them back to the disbelievers: they
are not lawful wives for them, nor are the disbelievers their lawful
husbands. Give the disbelievers whatever bride-gifts they have
paid–– if you choose to marry them, there is no blame on you once
you have paid their bride-gifts–– and do not yourselves hold on to
marriage ties with disbelieving women. Ask for repayment of the
bride-gifts you have paid, and let the disbelievers do the same. This
is God’s judgement: He judges between you, God is all knowing and
wise. 11 If any of you have wives who leave you for the disbelievers,
and if your community subsequently acquires [gains] from them,
then pay those whose wives have deserted them the equivalent of
whatever bride-gift they paid. Be mindful of God, in whom you
believe.
12 Prophet, when believing women come and pledge to you that
they will not ascribe any partner to God, nor steal, nor commit
adultery, nor kill their children, nor lie about who has fathered their
children, a nor disobey you in any righteous thing, then you should
accept their pledge of allegiance and pray to God to forgive them:
God is most forgiving and merciful.
13 You who believe, do not take as allies those with whom God is
angry: they despair of the life to come as the disbelievers despair of
those buried in their graves.
a This is a common interpretation of the idiom ‘what is between their hands and their
feet’ (Razi).

61. SOLID LINES
A Medinan sura encouraging the believers to stick together in support of God’s
cause (hence the title of the sura, cf. verse 4). It criticizes those who broke their
word (verse 3) and those who argued against the faith (verses 7–8). Moses and
Jesus are cited as examples of prophets whose communities were divided: the
rebellious were left to stray and the faithful granted success (verses 5–6, 14).
The rewards of those who strive in God’s cause are described in some detail
(verses 11–13).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Everything in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes God––He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2 You who believe, why do you say things and
then do not do them? a 3 It is most hateful to God that you say things
and then do not do them; 4 God truly loves those who ﬁght in solid
lines for His cause, like a well-compacted wall.
5 Moses said to his people, ‘My people, why do you hurt me when
you know that I am sent to you by God?’ When they went astray,
God left their hearts to stray: God does not guide rebellious people.
6 Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Children of Israel, I am sent to you by
God, conﬁrming the Torah that came before me and bringing good
news of a messenger to follow me whose name will be Ahmad.’ b Yet
when he came to them with clear signs, they said, ‘This is obviously
sorcery.’
7 Who could be more wrong than someone who invents lies against
God when called to submit to Him? God does not guide the wrongdoers: 8 they wish to put His light out with their mouths. But He will
perfect His light, even though the disbelievers hate it; 9 it is He who
sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to show
that it is above all [other] religions, even though the idolaters hate it.
10 You who believe, shall I show you a bargain c that will save you
from painful torment? 11 Have faith in God and His Messenger and
struggle for His cause with your possessions and your persons––that
Some asked to ﬁght, but when God ordained ﬁghting they failed to do so.
Ahmad, like Muhammad, means ‘praised’ (for his good character).
c Literally ‘a trade’.
a
b

61: 14

Solid Lines

371

is better for you, if only you knew–– 12 and He will forgive your sins,
admit you into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, into pleasant
dwellings in the Gardens of Eternity. That is the supreme triumph.
13 And He will give you something else that will really please you: His
help and an imminent breakthrough. [Prophet], give the faithful the
good news. 14 You who believe, be God’s helpers. As Jesus, son of
Mary, said to the disciples, ‘Who will come with me to help God?’
The disciples said, ‘We shall be God’s helpers.’ Some of the Children of Israel believed and some disbelieved: We supported the
believers against their enemy and they were the ones who came out
on top.

62. THE DAY OF CONGREGATION
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the instruction to the believers to
observe the Friday prayer promptly and reliably when called (verses 9–11).
The sura reminds the Muslims of God’s grace in granting them a prophet
and the chance to grow spiritually (verses 2–4). Those who do not act in
accordance with the knowledge they have been given are criticized (verses
5–8).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Everything in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes God, the Controller,
the Holy One, the Almighty, the Wise. 2 It is He who raised a messenger, among the people who had no Scripture, to recite His revelations to them, to make them grow spiritually and teach them the
Scripture and wisdom––before that they were clearly astray––3 to
them and others yet to join them. He is the Almighty, the Wise:
4 such is God’s favour that He grants it to whoever He will; God’s
favour is immense. 5 Those who have been charged to obey the
Torah, but do not do so, are like asses a carrying books: how base
such people are who disobey God’s revelations! God does not guide
people who do wrong.
6 Say [Prophet], ‘You who follow the Jewish faith, if you truly
claim that out of all people you alone are friends of God, then you
should be hoping for death.’ 7 But because of what they have stored
up for themselves with their own hands they would never hope for
death––God knows the wrongdoers very well––8 so say, ‘The death
you run away from will come to meet you and you will be returned to
the One who knows the unseen as well as the seen: He will tell you
everything you have done.’
9 Believers! When the call to prayer is made on the day of
congregation, hurry towards the reminder of God and leave oﬀ your
trading––that is better for you, if only you knew––10 then when the
prayer has ended, disperse in the land and seek out God’s bounty.
Remember God often so that you may prosper. 11 Yet they scatter
a

Literally ‘an ass’, but the plural English construction requires the plural.

62: 11

The Day of Congregation

373

towards trade or entertainment whenever they observe it, and leave
you [Prophet] standing there. a Say, ‘God’s gift is better than any
entertainment or trade: God is the best provider.’
a This refers to two occasions. During congregational prayers at a time of famine, a
caravan arrived and some of the worshippers rushed out, leaving the Prophet standing
on the minbar (pulpit). On another occasion, worshippers rushed out because there was
a band playing for a wedding.

63. THE HYPOCRITES
A Medinan sura which warns the believers about the treachery of the hypocrites and describes their behaviour in some detail. A speciﬁc occasion on which
the hypocrites tried to stop anyone donating money to believers is described
(verses 7–8) and God calls on the Muslims to compensate for this by giving more
of their own funds to the needy (verses 9–11).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When the hypocrites come to you [Prophet], they say, ‘We bear
witness that you are the Messenger of God.’ God knows that you
truly are His Messenger and He bears witness that the hypocrites
are liars––2 they use their oaths as a cover and so bar others from
God’s way: what they have been doing is truly evil––3 because they
professed faith and then rejected it, so their hearts have been
sealed and they do not understand. 4 When you see them
[Prophet], their outward appearance pleases you; when they speak,
you listen to what they say. But they are like propped-up timbers––they think every cry they hear is against them––and they
are the enemy. Beware of them. May God confound them! How
devious they are!
5 They turn their heads away in disdain when they are told,
‘Come, so that the Messenger of God may ask forgiveness for
you,’ and you see them walking away arrogantly. 6 It makes no difference whether you ask forgiveness for them or not, God will not
forgive them: God does not guide such treacherous people. 7 They
are the ones who say, ‘Give nothing to those who follow God’s
Messenger, until they abandon him’, but to God belong the
treasures of the heavens and earth, though the hypocrites do not
understand this. 8 They say, ‘Once we return to Medina the powerful will drive out the weak,’ but power belongs to God, to His
Messenger, and to the believers, though the hypocrites do not
know this.
9 Believers, do not let your wealth and your children distract you
from remembering God: those who do so will be the ones who lose.
10 Give out of what We have provided for you, before death comes to

63: 11

The Hypocrites

375

one of you and he says, ‘My Lord, if You would only reprieve me
for a little while, I would give in charity and become one of the
righteous.’ 11 God does not reprieve a soul when its turn comes: God
is fully aware of what you do.

64. MUTUAL NEGLECT
A Medinan sura that gets its title from verse 9. The sura opens with a description of God’s power, wisdom, and knowledge (verses 1–4). The disbelievers are
reminded of the end of those who disbelieved before them (verses 5–6), and
their denial of the Resurrection is strongly refuted (verse 7). The believers are
urged to be wary but forgiving of the enemies they may have within their own
families (verses 14–15) and warned to remain steadfast and to spend in God’s
cause (verses 8–10, 16–18).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Everything that is in the heavens and earth gloriﬁes God; all control
and all praise belong to Him; He has power over everything. 2 It is He
who created you, yet some of you disbelieve and some believe: God
sees everything you do. 3 He created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose; He formed you and made your forms good: you will all
return to Him. 4 He knows what is in the heavens and earth; He
knows what you conceal and what you reveal; God knows very well
the secrets of every heart.
5 [Disbelievers], have you not heard about those who disbelieved
before you? They tasted the evil consequences of their conduct, and
a painful torment awaits them. 6 That is because their messengers
came to them with clear signs, yet they said, ‘Should we take guidance from mere mortals?’, rejected the message, and turned away. But
God had no need for them: He is all suﬃcient, worthy of all praise.
7 The disbelievers claim they will not be raised from the dead. Say
[Prophet], ‘Yes indeed! I swear by my Lord! You will be raised and
then you will be informed about everything you have done: an easy
matter for God.’
8 So believe in God, in His Messenger, and in the light a We have
sent down: God is fully aware of what you do. 9 When He gathers
you for the Day of Gathering, the Day of mutual neglect, b He will
a

The Qur an.
The Arabic taghabun is reciprocal from ghabina, ‘to neglect or forget’. Everyone
will be so preoccupied with their own fate that they will neglect everyone else
(cf. 70: 10–11; 80: 34–7).
b

64: 18

Mutual Neglect

377

cancel the sins of those who believed in Him and acted righteously:
He will admit them into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams,
there to remain for ever–– the supreme triumph. 10 But those who
disbelieved and rejected Our signs will be the inhabitants of the Fire,
there to remain–– a miserable destination.
11 Misfortunes can only happen with God’s permission a ––He will
guide the heart of anyone who believes in Him: God knows all
things––12 so obey God and the Messenger. If you turn away,
remember that Our Messenger’s duty is only to make plain his
message. 13 God! There is no god but Him, so let the faithful put
their trust in Him. 14 Believers, even among your spouses and your
children you have some enemies–– beware of them–– but if you
overlook their oﬀences, forgive them, pardon them, then God is all
forgiving, all merciful.
15 Your wealth and your children are only a test for you. There is
great reward with God: 16 be mindful of God as much as you can;
hear and obey; be charitable–– it is for your own good. Those who are
saved from their own meanness will be the prosperous ones: 17 if you
make a generous loan to God He will multiply it for you and forgive
you. God is ever thankful and forbearing; 18 He knows the unseen, as
well as the seen; He is the Almighty, the Wise.
a Abu Muslim gives the explanation that some of the believers’ families tried to
dissuade them from emigrating and from jihad because they feared for their safety
(Razi). See verse 14.

65. DIVORCE
A Medinan sura that outlines regulations concerning divorce (verses 1–7). The
sura strongly urges people to observe God’s regulations and guidance. To
reinforce this they are reminded of the fate of earlier disobedient peoples and the
rewards of the obedient. God’s power and knowledge are emphasized at the end
(verse 12).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Prophet, when any of you intend to divorce women, do so at a time
when their prescribed waiting period can properly start, a and calculate the period carefully: be mindful of God, your Lord. Do not drive
them out of their homes––nor should they themselves leave––unless
they commit a ﬂagrant indecency. These are the limits set by God––
whoever oversteps God’s limits wrongs his own soul––for you
cannot know what new situation God may perhaps bring about.
2 When they have completed their appointed term, either keep
them honourably, or part with them honourably. Call two just witnesses from your people and establish witness for the sake of God.
Anyone who believes in God and the Last Day should heed this:
God will ﬁnd a way out for those who are mindful of Him, 3 and will
provide for them from an unexpected source; God will be enough for
those who put their trust in Him. God achieves His purpose; God
has set a due measure for everything.
4 If you are in doubt, the period of waiting will be three months for
those women who have ceased menstruating and for those who have
not [yet] menstruated; the waiting period of those who are pregnant
will be until they deliver their burden: God makes things easy for
those who are mindful of Him. 5 This is God’s command, which He
has sent down to you. God will wipe out the sinful deeds and
increase the rewards of anyone who is mindful of Him.
6 House the wives you are divorcing according to your means,
wherever you house yourselves, and do not harass them so as to
make their lives diﬃcult. If they are pregnant, maintain them
a The waiting period starts properly after menstruation and before intercourse is
resumed, and lasts for three menstrual cycles.

65: 12

Divorce

379

until they are delivered of their burdens; if they suckle your infants,
pay them for it. Consult together in a good way–– if you make
diﬃculties for one another, another woman may suckle the child for
the father a ––7 and let the wealthy man spend according to his wealth.
But let him whose provision is restricted spend according to what
God has given him: God does not burden any soul with more than
He has given it–– after hardship, God will bring ease.
8 Many a town that insolently opposed the command of its Lord
and His messengers We have brought sternly to account: We
punished them severely 9 to make them taste the ill eﬀect of their
conduct–– the result of their conduct was ruin. 10 God has prepared a
severe torment for them.
So, you who have understanding, you who believe, beware of God.
He has sent you the Qur an 11 and a messenger–– reciting to you
God’s revelations that make things clear–– to bring those who believe
and do righteous deeds from darkness into light. God will admit
those who believe in Him and do righteous deeds into Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams, where they will remain for ever–– He
has made good provision for them.
12 It is God who created seven heavens and a similar [number]
of earths. His command b descends throughout them. So you should
realize that He has power over all things and that His knowledge
encompasses everything.
a
b

In Islamic law it is the father’s responsibility to pay for his child to be fed.
Or ‘His revelation’.

66. PROHIBITION
A Medinan sura that discusses episodes in the Prophet’s home life. It chides
two of the Prophet’s wives for an incident when a conﬁdence was betrayed
(verses 3–5) and urges all believers to submit themselves to God and to guard
themselves and their families against Hellﬁre (verses 6–8). The sura closes by
giving examples of believing and disbelieving women (verses 10–12).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Prophet, why do you prohibit what God has made lawful to you a in
your desire to please your wives? Yet God is forgiving and merciful:
2 He has ordained a way for you [believers] to release you from [such]
oaths b ––God is your helper: He is the All Knowing, the Wise.
3 The Prophet told something in conﬁdence to one of his wives.
When she disclosed it [to another wife] and God made this known to
him, he conﬁrmed part of it, keeping the rest to himself. When
he confronted her with what she had done, she asked, ‘Who told you
about this?’ and he replied, ‘The All Knowing, the All Aware told
me.’ 4 If both of you [wives] repent to God––for your hearts have
deviated––[all will be well]; if you collaborate against him, [be
warned that] God will aid him, as will Gabriel and all righteous
believers, and the angels too will back him. 5 His Lord may well
replace you with better wives if the Prophet decides to divorce any of
you: wives who are devoted to God, true believers, devout, who turn
to Him in repentance and worship Him, given to fasting, whether
previously married or virgins.
6 Believers, guard yourselves and your families against a Fire
fuelled by people and stones, over which stand angels, stern and
strong; angels who never disobey God’s commands to them, but do
as they are ordered: 7 ‘You who disbelieve, make no excuses today:
you are only being repaid for what you used to do.’
8 Believers, turn to God in sincere repentance. Your Lord may well
a The Prophet had made an oath to abstain from something: either honey or conjugal
relations with one or more of his wives. Razi gives several stories to explain this.
b See 5: 89. If a Muslim swears an oath which may be counter to what is right, he is
allowed release, provided he gives expiation.

66: 12

Prohibition

381

cancel your bad deeds for you and admit you into Gardens graced
with ﬂowing streams, on a Day when God will not disgrace the
Prophet or those who have believed with him. With their lights
streaming out ahead of them and to their right, they will say, ‘Lord,
perfect our lights for us and forgive us: You have power over
everything.’
9 Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites.
Deal with them sternly. Hell will be their home, an evil destination!
10 God has given examples of disbelievers: the wives of Noah and Lot
who married two of Our righteous servants but betrayed them.
Their husbands could not help them against God: it was said, ‘Both
of you enter the Fire with the others.’ 11 God has also given examples
of believers: Pharaoh’s wife, who said, ‘Lord, build me a house near
You in the Garden. Save me from Pharaoh and his actions; save me
from the evildoers,’ 12 and Mary, daughter of  Imran. She guarded
her chastity, so We breathed into her from Our spirit. She accepted
the truth of her Lord’s words and Scriptures: she was truly devout.

67. CONTROL a
A Meccan sura that challenges the disbelievers with declarations of God’s
total power over them, and everything else, in this world and the next.
It describes the regret the disbelievers will express on the Day of Resurrection
(verses 9–10, 27).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Exalted b is He who holds all control in His hands; who has power
over all things; 2 who created death and life c to test you [people] and
reveal which of you does best––He is the Mighty, the Forgiving;
3 who created the seven heavens, one above the other. You will not see
any ﬂaw in what the Lord of Mercy creates. Look again! Can you see
any ﬂaw? 4 Look again! And again! Your sight will turn back to you,
weak and defeated.
5 We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and made them
[missiles] for stoning devils d for whom We have also prepared the
torment of a blazing ﬁre. 6 For those who defy their Lord We have
prepared the torment of Hell: an evil destination. 7 They will hear it
drawing in its breath when they are thrown in. It blazes forth,
8 almost bursting with rage. Its keepers will ask every group that is
thrown in, ‘Did no one come to warn you?’ 9 They will reply, ‘Yes, a
warner did come to us, but we did not believe him. We said, “God
has revealed nothing: you are greatly misguided”.’ 10 They will say,
‘If only we had listened, or reasoned, we would not be with the
inhabitants of the blazing ﬁre,’ and 11 they will confess their sins.
Away with the inhabitants of the blazing ﬁre! 12 But there is forgiveness and a great reward for those who fear their Lord though they
cannot see Him.
13 Whether you keep your words secret or state them openly, He
knows the contents of every heart. 14 How could He who created not
know His own creation, when He is the Most Subtle, the All Aware?
15 It is He who has made the earth manageable for you––travel its
a

Or ‘Sovereignty’.
This meaning of tabarak is supported by Razi and is more appropriate here than
‘blessed’.
c Cf. 40: 10, 2: 28, 53: 44, 2: 155.
d Cf. 37: 6–10.
b

67: 30

Control

383

regions; eat His provision–– and to Him you will be resurrected.
16 Are you sure that He who is in Heaven will not make the earth
swallow you up with a violent shudder? 17 Are you sure that He who
is in Heaven will not send a whirlwind to pelt you with stones?
You will come to know what My warning means. 18 Those who
went before them also disbelieved–– how terrible was My condemnation! 19 Do they not see the birds above them spreading and closing
their wings? It is only the Lord of Mercy who holds them up: He
watches over everything. 20 What force can help you if the Lord of
Mercy does not? The disbelievers are truly deluded. 21 Who can
provide for you if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in
their insolence and their avoidance of the Truth. 22 Who is better
guided: someone who falls on his face, or someone who walks
steadily on a straight path?
23 Say [Prophet], ‘It is He who brought you into being, He who
endowed you with hearing, sight, and understanding–– what small
thanks you give!’ 24 Say, ‘It is He who scattered you throughout the
earth, He to whom you will be gathered.’ 25 They say, ‘If what you
say is true, when will this promise be fulﬁlled?’ 26 Say, ‘God alone has
knowledge of this: my only duty is to give clear warning.’ 27 When
they see it close at hand, the disbelievers’ faces will be gloomy, and it
will be said, ‘This is what you were calling for.’ 28 Say, ‘Just think––
regardless of whether God destroys me and my followers a or has
mercy on us–– who will protect the disbelievers from an agonizing
torment?’ 29 Say, ‘He is the Lord of Mercy; we believe in Him; we
put our trust in Him. You will come to know in time who is in
obvious error.’ 30 Say, ‘Just think: if all your water were to sink deep
into the earth who could give you ﬂowing water in its place?’
a Reports state that the Meccans were hoping that the Prophet would die, so that they
could be rid of him once and for all.

68. THE PEN
An early Meccan sura that deals with the accusation that Muhammad was not
God’s Messenger but merely mad (verses 2–6). The arrogance of those who
assume that, because they have some of the good things in this life, they can
reject the Revelation, is rebutted (verses 10–16). Examples are given of those who
came to regret their arrogance (verses 17–33). The Prophet is urged to remain
steadfast (verses 48–52).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Nun
By the pen! By all they write! a 2 Your Lord’s grace b does not make
you [Prophet] a madman: 3 you will have a never-ending reward––
4 truly you have a strong character––5 and soon you will see, as will
they, 6 which of you is aﬄicted with madness. 7 Your Lord knows best
who strays from His path and who is rightly guided. 8 So do not yield
to those who deny the truth––9 they want you to compromise with
them and then they will compromise with you––10 do not yield to any
contemptible swearer, 11 to any backbiter, slander-monger, 12 or hinderer of good, to anyone who is sinful, aggressive, 13 coarse, and on
top of all that, an imposter. c 14 Just because he has wealth and sons,
15 when our revelations are recited to him, he says, ‘These are just
ancient fables.’ 16 We shall brand him on the snout!
17 We have tried them as We tried the owners of a certain garden,
who swore that they would harvest its fruits in the morning 18 and
made no allowance [for the Will of God]: d 19 a disaster from your
Lord struck the garden as they slept 20 and by morning it was

a This could refer to the angels and what they write down of people’s deeds or to the
generic pen and what people write, thus swearing by the ability to write with which God
endowed human beings. Cf. 96: 4–5.
b Receiving God’s revelation. See esp. 15: 6 for the accusation of madness, which
occurs countless times with reference to various prophets in the Qur an. Another interpretation is ‘by God’s grace . . .’.
c This is said to refer to al-Walid ibn al-Mughira, a staunch opponent of the Prophet.
d Or ‘[for the poor]’.

68: 50

The Pen

385

stripped bare, a desolate land. 21 Still they called each other at daybreak, 22 ‘Go early to your ﬁeld if you wish to gather all its fruits,’
23 and went oﬀ, whispering, 24 ‘Make sure no poor person enters the
garden today!’––25 they left early, bent on their purpose–– 26 but when
they saw the garden, they said, ‘We must have lost our way! 27 No––
we are ruined!’ 28 The wisest of them said, ‘Did I not say to you,
“Will you not glorify God?”’–– 29 they said, ‘Glory be to God, Our
Lord! Truly, we were doing wrong!’–– 30 and then they turned to each
other in mutual reproach. 31 They said, ‘Alas for us! We have done
terrible wrong, 32 but maybe our Lord will give us something better
in its place: we truly turn to Him in hope.’ 33 Such is the punishment
[in this life], but greater still is the punishment in the Hereafter, if
only they knew.
34 There will be Gardens of bliss for those who are mindful of
God. 35 Should We treat those who submit to Us as We treat those
who do evil? 36 What is the matter with you? On what basis do you
judge? 37 Do you have a Scripture that tells you 38 that you will be
granted whatever you choose? 39 Have you received from Us solemn
oaths, binding to the Day of Resurrection, that you will get whatever
you yourselves decide? 40 Ask them [Prophet] which of them will
guarantee this. 41 Do they have ‘partners’ [besides God]? Let them
produce their ‘partners’, if what they say is true. 42 On the Day when
matters become dire, a they will be invited to prostrate themselves
but will be prevented b from doing so, 43 and their eyes will be downcast and they will be overwhelmed with shame: they were invited to
prostrate themselves when they were safe [but refused].
44 So [Prophet] leave those who reject this revelation to Me: We
shall lead them on, step by step, in ways beyond their knowledge; 45 I
will allow them more time, for My plan is powerful. 46 Do you
demand some reward from them that would burden them with debt?
47 Do they have knowledge of the unseen that enables them to write it
down? 48 Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement: do not
be like the man in the whale who called out in distress: 49 if his Lord’s
grace had not reached him, he would have been left, abandoned and
blameworthy, on the barren shore, 50 but his Lord chose him and
a

This is the meaning of the Arabic expression ‘when shins are bared’.
Baydawi suggests that this is because the time for obedience is over, or because they
are somehow unable to do so (Tafsir).
b

386

The Qur an

68: 51

made him one of the Righteous. 51 The disbelievers almost strike you
down with their looks when they hear the Qur an. They say, ‘He
must be mad!’ 52 but truly it is nothing other than a Reminder for all
peoples.

69. THE INEVITABLE HOUR
A Meccan sura that describes punishment in this life (verses 4–12) and the next
(verses 13–18). The bliss to be enjoyed by the believers is eloquently contrasted
with the torments of hell (verses 19–37). From verse 38 onwards, God aﬃrms
the Truth of the Qur an and the Prophet.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 The Inevitable Hour! 2 What is the Inevitable Hour? 3 What will
explain to you what the Inevitable Hour is?
4 The people of Thamud and  Ad denied that the crashing blow a
would come: 5 Thamud was destroyed by a deafening blast; 6  Ad was
destroyed by a furious wind 7 that God let loose against them for
seven consecutive nights, eight consecutive days, so that you could
have seen its people lying dead like hollow palm-trunks. 8 Can you
see any trace of them now? 9 Pharaoh, too, and those before him, and
the ruined cities: these people committed grave sins and disobeyed
the messenger of their Lord, so He seized them with an evertightening grip. 10 But when the Flood rose high, 11 We saved you in
the ﬂoating ship, 12 making that event a reminder for you: attentive
ears may take heed.
13 When the Trumpet is sounded a single time, 14 when the earth
and its mountains are raised high and then crushed with a single
blow, 15 on that Day the Great Event will come to pass. 16 The sky will
be torn apart on that Day, it will be so frail. 17 The angels will be on
all sides of it and, on that Day, eight of them will bear the throne of
your Lord above them. 18 On that Day you will be brought to judgement and none of your secrets will remain hidden. 19 Anyone who is
given his Record in his right hand will say, ‘Here is my Record, read
it. 20 I knew I would meet my Reckoning,’ 21 and so he will have a
pleasant life 22 in a lofty Garden, 23 with clustered fruit within his
reach. 24 It will be said, ‘Eat and drink to your heart’s content as a
reward for what you have done in days gone by.’ 25 But anyone who is
given his Record in his left hand will say, ‘If only I had never been
a

Cf. the sura of this name (Sura 101).

388

The Qur an

69: 26

given any Record 26 and knew nothing of my Reckoning. 27 How I
wish death had been the end of me. 28 My wealth has been no use to
me, 29 and my power has vanished.’ 30 ‘Take him, put a collar on him,
31 lead him to burn in the blazing Fire, 32 and [bind him] in a chain
seventy metres a long: 33 he would not believe in Almighty God, 34 he
never encouraged feeding the hungry, 35 so today he has no real
friend here, 36 and the only food he has is the ﬁlth 37 that only sinners
eat.’
38 So I swear by what you can see 39 and by what you cannot see:
40 this [Qur an] is the speech of an honoured messenger, 41 not the
words of a poet–– how little you believe!–– 42 nor the words of a soothsayer–– how little you reﬂect! 43 This [Qur an] is a message sent down
from the Lord of the Worlds: 44 if [the Prophet] had attributed some
fabrication to Us, 45 We would certainly have seized his right hand
46 and cut oﬀ his lifeblood, b 47 and none of you could have defended
him. 48 This [Qur an] is a reminder for those who are aware of God.
49 We know that some of you consider it to be lies–– 50 this will be a
source of bitter regret for the disbelievers–– 51 but it is in fact the
certain Truth. 52 So [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the
Almighty.
a
b

A dhira is an arm’s-length.
Literally ‘artery’.

70. THE WAYS OF ASCENT
A Meccan sura that describes the Day of Judgement (verses 8–18). One of the
opponents of the Prophet challenged him to hasten the punishment they had
been threatened with (verse 1), so the foolishness of the disbelievers in denying
the Resurrection (verse 6) is exposed (verses 36–44). The people who will be
granted the Garden are described (verses 22–35). The title is a reference to the
paths through which angels ascend to God, mentioned in verses 3–4.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 A man [mockingly] demanded the punishment. 2 It will fall on the
disbelievers––none can deﬂect it––3 from God, the Lord of the Ways
of Ascent, 4 by which the angels and the Spirit ascend to Him, on a
Day whose length is ﬁfty thousand years. 5 So be patient, [Prophet],
as beﬁts you. 6 The disbelievers think it is distant, 7 but We know it to
be close. 8 On a Day when the heavens will be like molten brass 9 and
the mountains like tufts of wool, 10 when no friend will ask about his
friend, 11 even when they are within sight of one another. The guilty
person will wish he could save himself from the suﬀering of that Day
by sacriﬁcing his sons, 12 his spouse, his brother, 13 the kinsfolk who
gave him shelter, 14 and everyone on earth, if it could save him. 15 But
no! There is a raging ﬂame 16 that strips away the skin, 17 and it will
claim everyone who rejects the truth, turns away, 18 amasses wealth
and hoards it.
19 Man was truly created anxious: 20 he is fretful when misfortune
touches him, 21 but tight-ﬁsted when good fortune comes his way.
22 Not so those who pray 23 and are constant in their prayers; 24 who
give a due share of their wealth 25 to beggars and the deprived;
26 who believe in the Day of Judgement 27 and fear the punishment of
their Lord––28 none may feel wholly secure from it––29 who guard
their chastity 30 from all but their spouses or their slave-girls––there
is no blame attached to [relations with] these, 31 but those whose
desires exceed this limit are truly transgressors––32 who are faithful
to their trusts and their pledges; 33 who give honest testimony 34 and
are steadfast in their prayers. 35 They will be honoured in Gardens of
bliss.

390

The Qur an

70: 36

36 What is wrong with the disbelievers? Why do they rush to peer
at you [Prophet], 37 from right and left, in crowds? 38 Does every one
of them expect to enter a Garden of bliss? 39 No! We created them
from the substance they know, a 40 and, by the Lord of every sunrise
and sunset, We have the power 41 to substitute for them others better
than they are–– nothing can prevent Us from doing this. 42 So leave
them to wallow in idle talk, until they come face to face with their
promised Day, 43 the Day they will rush out of their graves as if
rallying to a ﬂag, 44 eyes downcast and covered in shame: that is the
Day of which they were warned.
a They deny the Resurrection, and this points out to them that God has the power to
create them from such a small beginning and that He can bring about the Resurrection.
Cf. 56: 56–62.

71. NOAH
A Meccan sura giving further details of the life of Noah before the Flood, to
encourage the Prophet and warn the disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 We sent Noah to his people: ‘Warn your people, before a painful
punishment comes to them.’ 2 And so he said, ‘My people, I am here
to warn you plainly. 3 Serve God, be mindful of Him and obey me.
4 He will forgive you your sins and spare you until your appointed
time––when God’s appointed time arrives it cannot be postponed. If
only you understood!’
5 He said, ‘My Lord, I have called my people night and day, 6 but
the more I call them, the further they run away: 7 every time I call
them, so that You may forgive them, they thrust their ﬁngers into their
ears, cover their heads with their garments, persist in their rejection,
and grow more insolent and arrogant. 8 I have tried calling them
openly. 9 I have tried preaching to them in public and speaking to
them in private. 10 I said, “Ask forgiveness of your Lord: He is ever
forgiving. 11 He will send down abundant rain from the sky for you;
12 He will give you wealth and sons; He will provide you with gardens
and rivers. 13 What is the matter with you? Why will you not fear
God’s majesty, 14 when He has created you stage by stage? a 15 Have
you ever wondered how God created seven heavens, one above the
other, 16 placed the moon as a light in them and the sun as a lamp,
17 how God made you spring forth from the earth like a plant, 18 how
He will return you into it and then bring you out again, 19 and how
He has spread the Earth out for you 20 to walk along its spacious
paths?” ’
21 Noah said, ‘My Lord, they have disobeyed me and followed
those whose riches and children only increase their ruin; 22 who have
made a grand plan, 23 saying, “Do not renounce your gods! 24 Do not
renounce Wadd, Suwa , Yaghuth, Ya uq, or Nasr!” b They have led
a
b

See 22: 5; 23: 12–15.
Names of idols.

392

The Qur an

71: 25

many astray. Lord, bring nothing but destruction a down on the
evildoers!’
25 They were drowned and sent to Hell for their evildoings: they
found no one to help them against God. 26 And Noah said, ‘Lord, do
not leave any of the disbelievers on the earth–– 27 if you leave them
they will lead Your servants astray and beget only sinners and disbelievers–– 28 Lord, forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my
house as a believer. Forgive believing men and women but bring
nothing but ruin down on the evildoers!’
a

See al-Mu jam al-Wasit for this meaning of dalal.

72. THE JINN a
A Meccan sura that gives an account of what a group of jinn said when they
overheard a recitation of the Qur an and realized its truth (verses 1–15). This
is a lesson to the Meccan Arabs, who are also told that the Prophet can help
them only by delivering the Message––God is the All Powerful One (verses
16–28). The disbelievers are threatened with what they will meet on the Day
of Judgement (verses 23–7).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Say [Prophet], ‘It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn once
listened in and said, “We have heard a wondrous Qur an, 2 that gives
guidance to the right path, and we have come to believe it––We shall
never set up partners with our Lord––3 and that He––exalted be the
glory of our Lord!––has neither spouse nor child. 4 Outrageous
things have been said about God by the foolish among us, 5 although
we had thought that no man or jinn would [dare to] tell a lie about
Him. 6 Men have sought refuge with the jinn in the past, but they
only misguided them further. 7 They thought, as you did, that God
would never raise anyone from the dead. 8 We tried to reach heaven,
but discovered it to be full of stern guards and shooting stars––9 we
used to sit in places there, listening, b but anyone trying to listen now
will ﬁnd a shooting star lying in wait for him––10 [so now] we do not
know whether those who live on earth are due for misfortune, or
whether their Lord intends to guide them. 11 Some of us are righteous and others less so: we follow diﬀerent paths. 12 We know we can
never frustrate God on earth; we can never escape Him. 13 When we
heard the guidance we came to believe: whoever believes in his Lord
need fear no loss nor injustice. 14 Some of us submit to Him and
others go the wrong way: those who submit to God have found wise
guidance, 15 but those who go wrong will be fuel for Hellﬁre.” ’
16 If they c had taken to the right way, We would have given them
a

Unseen beings.
They were listening for hints of what might come next, but in verse 10 they say they
are no longer able to know the future (cf. verse 26 below).
c The Meccan Arabs.
b

394

The Qur an

72: 17

abundant water to drink–– 17 a test for them a ––but anyone who turns
away from his Lord’s Revelation will be sent by Him to spiralling
torment. 18 Places of worship are for God alone–– so do not pray to
anyone other than God–– 19 yet when God’s Servant b stood up to
pray to Him, they pressed in on him. 20 Say, ‘I pray to my Lord alone;
I set up no partner with Him.’ 21 Say, ‘I have no control over any
harm or good that may befall you.’ 22 Say, ‘No one can protect me
from God: I have no refuge except in Him. 23 I only deliver [what I
receive] from God–– only His messages.’
Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will have Hell’s Fire
as his permanent home: 24 when they are confronted by what they
have been warned about, they will realize who has the weaker protector and the smaller number. 25 Say, ‘I do not know whether what
you have been warned about is near, or whether a distant time has
been appointed for it by my Lord.’ 26 He is the One who knows what
is hidden. 27 He does not disclose it except to a messenger of His
choosing. He sends watchers to go in front and behind 28 to ensure
that each of His messengers delivers his Lord’s message: He knows
all about them, and He takes account of everything.
a In the Qur an, plenty is as great a test as privation (see 21: 35), if not greater (see
10: 21–2).
b Muhammad.

73. ENFOLDED
A sura that is part very early Meccan, part Medinan (verse 20). This verse
describes how God relaxed the early regime of devotion ﬁrst imposed on the
Prophet (in verses 1–9) to prepare him for the weighty message. The Prophet is
urged to be patient (verses 10–11), told of the punishment that awaits the
Meccan disbelievers in Hell (verses 12–14), and reminded of the punishment
that befell Pharaoh in this life (verses 15–16).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 You [Prophet], enfolded in your cloak! 2 Stay up throughout the
night, all but a small part of it, 3 half, or a little less, 4 or a little more;
recite the Qur an slowly and distinctly: 5 We shall send a momentous
message down to you. 6 Night prayer a makes a deeper impression and
sharpens words––7 you are kept busy for long periods of the day––
8 so celebrate the name of your Lord and devote yourself wholeheartedly to Him. 9 He is Lord of the east and west, there is no god but
Him, so take Him as your Protector, 10 patiently endure what they
say, ignore them politely, 11 and leave to Me those who deny the truth
and live in luxury. Bear with them for a little while; 12 We have
fetters, a blazing ﬁre, 13 food that chokes, and agonizing torment in
store for them 14 on the Day when the earth and the mountains will
shake. The mountains will become a heap of loose sand.
15 We have sent a messenger to you [people] to be your witness, just
as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh, 16 but Pharaoh disobeyed the
messenger and so We inﬂicted a heavy punishment on him. 17 So if
you disbelieve, how can you guard yourselves against a Day that will
turn children’s hair grey, 18 a Day when the sky will be torn apart?
God’s promise will certainly be fulﬁlled. 19 This is a reminder. Let
whoever wishes take the way to his Lord.
20 [Prophet], your Lord is well aware that you sometimes spend
nearly two-thirds of the night at prayer––sometimes half, sometimes
a third––as do some of your followers. God determines the division
of night and day. He knows that you will not be able to keep a
a

Or ‘the hours of night’/‘getting up at night’.

396

The Qur an

73: 20

measure of it and He has relented towards all of you, so recite as
much of the Qur an as is easy for you. He knows that some of you
will be sick, some of you travelling through the land seeking God’s
bounty, some of you ﬁghting in God’s way: recite as much as is easy
for you, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and make God
a good loan. Whatever good you store up for yourselves will be
improved and increased for you. Ask God for His forgiveness, He is
most forgiving, most merciful.

74. WRAPPED IN HIS CLOAK
After his ﬁrst encounter with the Angel of Revelation in the Cave of Hira, the
Prophet went home trembling and asked his wife to cover him with his cloak.
The ﬁrst verses of this Meccan sura were then revealed (verses 1–7). The sura
goes on, in a section from a later period, to remind the obstinate disbelievers
of their fate on the Day of Judgement (verses 8–10) and a speciﬁc opponent of
the Prophet is singled out (verses 11–31). The end of the sura (verses 39–53)
exposes the foolishness of the disbelievers’ attitude to the Revelation and the
Day of Resurrection.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 You, wrapped in your cloak, 2 arise and give warning! 3 Proclaim the
greatness of your Lord; 4 cleanse yourself; a 5 keep away from all
ﬁlth; b 6 do not be overwhelmed and weaken; c 7 be steadfast in your
Lord’s cause.
8 When the Trumpet sounds, 9 that will be a Day of anguish for the
disbelievers. 10 They will have no ease. 11 [Prophet], leave Me to deal
with the one I created helpless, d 12 then gave vast wealth, 13 and sons
by his side, 14 making everything easy for him––15 yet he still hopes I
will give him more. 16 No! He has been stubbornly hostile to Our
revelation: 17 I will inﬂict a spiralling torment on him. 18 He planned
and plotted––19 devilishly he plotted! 20 ferociously he plotted!––
21 and looked 22 and frowned and scowled 23 and turned away and
behaved arrogantly 24 and said, ‘This is just old sorcery, 25 just the talk
of a mortal!’
26 I will throw him into the scorching Fire. 27 What will explain to
you what the scorching Fire is? 28 It spares nothing and leaves
nothing; 29 it scorches the ﬂesh of humans; 30 there are nineteen in
charge of it––31 none other than angels appointed by Us to guard

a

Literally ‘clean your garments’ (see Razi for this idiomatic usage of thiyab).
Or ‘from all idolatry’.
c An alternative translation would be ‘do not give, hoping only to receive’. The
translation given above is based on Mujahid’s understanding of manna as ‘to weaken’.
See Razi for this interpretation, which seems much more appropriate to the context.
d Al-Walid ibn al-Mughira, one of the Prophet’s obstinate opponents.
b

398

The Qur an

74: 32

Hellﬁre–– and We have made their number a a test for the disbelievers. So those who have been given the Scripture will be certain
and those who believe will have their faith increased: neither those
who have been given the Scripture nor the believers will have any
doubts, but the sick at heart and the disbelievers will say, ‘What
could God mean by this description?’ God leaves whoever He will to
stray and guides whoever He will–– no one knows your Lord’s forces
except Him–– this [description] is a warning to mortals. 32 Yes–– by
the moon! 33 By the departing night! 34 By the shining dawn! 35 It is
one of the mightiest things, 36 a warning to all mortals, 37 to those of
you who choose to go ahead and those who lag behind.
38 Every soul is held in pledge for its deeds, 39 but the Companions
of the Right will stay 40 in Gardens and ask 41 about the guilty.
42 ‘What drove you to the Scorching Fire?’ [they will ask] 43 and they
will answer, ‘We did not pray; 44 we did not feed the poor; 45 we
indulged with others [in mocking the believers]; 46 we denied the
Day of Judgement 47 until the Certain End came upon us.’ 48 No
intercessor’s plea will beneﬁt them now.
49 What is the matter with them? Why do they turn away from the
warning, 50 like frightened asses 51 ﬂeeing from a lion? 52 Each one of
them demands that a scripture be sent down to him and unrolled
before his very eyes–– 53 No! Truly they have no fear of the life to
come–– 54 but truly this is a reminder. 55 Let whoever wishes to take
heed do so: 56 they will only take heed if God so wishes. He is the
Lord who should be heeded, the Lord of forgiveness.
a Some have taken this literally to allude to a special signiﬁcance of the number 19,
but it is much more likely to be  idda in the meaning of ‘number, group’ (al-Mu jam
al-Wasit).

75. THE RESURRECTION
A Meccan sura, dealing with the Day of Resurrection and man’s denial of that
Day. God’s power is convincingly described in several vignettes (verses 3–4,
26–30, 34–40). The third paragraph instructs the Prophet on appropriate
reception of the revelation (verses 16–19), and thereby serves to emphasize
that the Qur an is indeed God’s word.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By a the Day of Resurrection 2 and by the self-reproaching soul!
3 Does man think We shall not put his bones back together?
4 In fact, We can reshape his very ﬁngertips. 5 Yet man wants to
deny what is ahead of him: 6 he says, ‘So, when will this Day of
Resurrection be?’
7 When eyes are dazzled 8 and the moon eclipsed, 9 when the sun
and the moon are brought together, 10 on that Day man will say,
‘Where can I escape?’ 11 Truly, there is no refuge: 12 they will all
return to your Lord on that Day. 13 On that Day, man will be told
what he put ﬁrst and what he put last. 14 Truly, man is a clear witness
against himself, 15 despite all the excuses he may put forward.
16 [Prophet], do not rush your tongue in an attempt to hasten
[your memorization of] the Revelation: 17 We shall make sure of its
safe collection and recitation. 18 When We have recited it, repeat the
recitation 19 and We shall make it clear.
20 Truly you [people] love this ﬂeeting world 21 and neglect the life
to come. 22 On that Day there will be radiant faces, 23 looking towards
their Lord, 24 and on that Day there will be the sad and despairing
faces 25 of those who realize that a great calamity is about to befall
them.
26 Truly, when the soul reaches the collarbone; 27 when it is said,
‘Could any charm-healer save him now?’; 28 when he knows it is the
ﬁnal parting; 29 when his legs are brought together: b 30 on that day he
will be driven towards your Lord. 31 He neither believed nor prayed,
a This is preceded by a phrase which can be rendered either ‘I swear’ or ‘I do not
swear’ (i.e. there is no need for me to swear), depending on how la is read.
b This is taken to refer to when a corpse is wrapped in the shroud.

400

The Qur an

75: 32

32 but denied the truth and turned away, 33 walking back to his people
with a conceited swagger.
34 Closer and closer it comes to you. 35 Closer and closer still.
36 Does man think he will be left alone? a 37 Was he not just a drop of
spilt-out sperm, 38 which became a clinging form, which God shaped
in due proportion, 39 fashioning from it the two sexes, male and
female? 40 Does He who can do this not have the power to bring the
dead back to life?
a

And not taken to account.

76. MAN a
A Medinan sura that speaks of how man is tested (verses 2–3) and what the
results will be for the evildoers (verse 4) and for the righteous (verses 5–22).
The Prophet is urged to persevere in his devotion and to bear with patience
(verses 23–6).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Was there not a period of time when man was nothing to speak of ? b
2 We created man from a drop of mingled ﬂuid to put him to the test;
We gave him hearing and sight; 3 We guided him to the right path,
whether he was grateful or not.
4 We have prepared chains, iron collars, and blazing Fire for the
disbelievers, but 5 the righteous will have a drink mixed with kafur, c
6 a spring for God’s servants, which ﬂows abundantly at their wish.
7 They fulﬁl their vows; they fear a day of widespread woes; 8 they
give food to the poor, the orphan, and the captive, though they love
it themselves, 9 saying, ‘We feed you for the sake of God alone: We
seek neither recompense nor thanks from you. 10 We fear the Day of
our Lord––a woefully grim Day.’ 11 So God will save them from the
woes of that Day, give them radiance and gladness, 12 and reward
them, for their steadfastness, with a Garden and silken robes.
13 They will sit on couches, feeling neither scorching heat nor biting
cold, 14 with shady [branches] spread above them and clusters of
fruit hanging close at hand. 15 They will be served with silver plates
16 and gleaming silver goblets according to their fancy, 17 and they
will be given a drink infused with ginger 18 from a spring called
Salsabil. 19 Everlasting youths will attend them––if you could see
them, you would think they were scattered pearls––20 and if you
were to look around, you would see bliss and great wealth: 21 they
will wear garments of green silk and brocade; they will be adorned
with silver bracelets; their Lord will give them a pure drink.
See footnote g, Sura 89.
Literally ‘Has there not come over man a period of time when he was not mentioned?’ This refers to the time before a person is born, the point being that he was
nothing, then God created him, just as He will bring him to life again for Judgement.
c A fragrant herb.
a
b

402

The Qur an

76: 22

22 [It will be said], ‘This is your reward. Your endeavours are
appreciated.’
23 We Ourself have sent down this Qur an to you [Prophet] in
gradual revelation. 24 Await your Lord’s Judgement with patience; do
not yield to any of these sinners or disbelievers; 25 remember the
name of your Lord at dawn and in the evening; 26 bow down before
Him, and glorify Him at length by night.
27 These people love the ﬂeeting life. They put aside [all thoughts
of] a Heavy Day. 28 Yet We created them; We strengthened their
constitution; if We please, We can replace such people completely.
29 This is a reminder. Let whoever wishes, take the way to his Lord.
30 But you will only wish to do so if God wills–– God is all knowing,
all wise–– 31 He admits whoever He will into His Mercy and has
prepared a painful torment for the disbelievers.

77. [WINDS] SENT FORTH a
A Meccan sura that describes the Day of Decision: its inevitability, arguments for its coming, and the events that will presage the Judgement, as well as
the fates of believers and disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the [winds] sent forth in swift succession, 2 violently storming,
3 scattering far and wide, 4 separating forcefully, 5 delivering a
reminder, 6 as a proof or a warning: 7 what you are promised will
come to pass. 8 When the stars are dimmed 9 and the sky is torn apart,
10 when the mountains are turned to dust 11 and the messengers given
their appointed time b ––12 for what Day has all this been set?
13 The Day of Decision. 14 What will explain to you what the Day of
Decision is? 15 Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth!
16 Did We not destroy the ﬁrst [of them]? 17 We shall make the last
follow them: 18 this is how We deal with the guilty. 19 Woe, on that
Day, to those who denied the truth!
20 Did We not make you from an underrated ﬂuid 21 which We
housed in a safe lodging 22 for a determined period? 23 We determine
[it]: how excellently We determine! 24 Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth! 25 Did We not make the earth a home 26 for the
living and the dead? 27 Did We not place ﬁrm, lofty mountains on it
and provide you with sweet water? 28 Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth!
29 They will be told, ‘Go to that which you used to deny! 30 Go to a
shadow of smoke!’ It rises in three columns; 31 no shade does it give,
nor relief from the ﬂame; 32 it shoots out sparks as large as treetrunks c 33 and as bright as copper. d 34 Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth! 35 On that Day they will be speechless, 36 and they
See 30: 48–51 and many other instances.
To give testimony for their communities (Razi).
c An alternative meaning of qasr is ‘palaces, castles’, but this meaning of ‘tree-trunks’
seems to ﬁt better (Razi).
d Commonly translated as ‘camels’, but ‘copper’ (reported by Razi) is a more
convincing alternative.
a
b

404

The Qur an

77: 37

will be given no chance to oﬀer any excuses. 37 Woe, on that Day, to
those who denied the truth! 38 [They will be told], ‘This is the Day of
Decision: We have gathered you and earlier generations. 39 If you
have any plots against Me, try them now.’ 40 Woe, on that Day, to
those who denied the truth! 41 But those who took heed of God will
enjoy cool shade, springs, 42 and any fruit they desire; 43 [they will be
told], ‘Eat and drink to your hearts’ content as a reward for your
deeds: 44 this is how We reward those who do good.’ 45 Woe, on that
Day, to those who denied the truth!
46 [You may] eat and enjoy yourselves for a short while, evildoers
that you are. 47 Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth!
48 When they are told, ‘Bow down in prayer,’ they do not do so. 49 Woe,
on that Day, to those who denied the truth! 50 In what revelation,
after this, will they believe?

78. THE ANNOUNCEMENT a
A Meccan sura. The disbelievers often asked incredulously about the
Resurrection. This sura gives evidence of God’s power, then explains what will
happen on the Day of Resurrection, and the respective fates of believers and
disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 What are they asking about? 2 The momentous announcement
3 about which they diﬀer. 4 They will ﬁnd out. 5 In the end they will
ﬁnd out. 6 Did We not make the earth smooth, 7 and make the
mountains to keep it stable? b 8 Did We not create you in pairs, 9 give
you sleep for rest, 10 the night as a cover, 11 and the day for your
livelihood? 12 Did We not build seven strong [heavens] above you,
13 and make a blazing lamp? 14 Did We not send water pouring down
from the clouds 15 to bring forth with it grain, plants, 16 and luxuriant gardens? 17 A time has been appointed for the Day of Decision:
18 a Day when the Trumpet will sound and you will come forward
in crowds, 19 when the sky will open up like wide portals, 20 when
the mountains will vanish like a mirage. 21 Hell lies in wait, 22 a
home for oppressors 23 to stay in for a long, long time, 24 where they
will taste no coolness nor drink 25 except one that is scalding and
dark c ––26 a ﬁtting requital, 27 for they did not fear a reckoning,
28 and they rejected Our messages as lies. 29 We have recorded everything in a Record. 30 ‘Taste this: all you will get from Us is more
torment.’
31 For those who were aware of God there is supreme fulﬁlment:
32 private gardens, vineyards, 33 nubile, well-matched companions,
34 and an overﬂowing cup. 35 There they will hear no vain or
lying talk: 36 a reward from your Lord, a ﬁtting gift 37 from the
Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between, the Lord of
Mercy.
They will have no authority from Him to speak. 38 On the Day
a

Of the Resurrection and Judgement.
Literally ‘and the mountains [as its] pegs’.
c Cf. 38: 57.

b

406

The Qur an

78: 39

when the Spirit a and the angels stand in rows, they will not speak
except for those to whom the Lord of Mercy gives permission, who
will say only what is right. 39 That is the Day of Truth. So whoever
wishes to do so should take the path that leads to his Lord. 40 We have
warned you of imminent torment, on the Day when every person
will see what their own hands have sent ahead for them, when the
disbeliever will say, ‘If only I were dust!’ b
a

The Angel Gabriel
In this world, they have often said, ‘What, when we are dust, shall we be raised
again?’
b

79. THE FORCEFUL CHARGERS
A Meccan sura, the main theme of which is the possibility and inevitability of
the Resurrection, its results, and its timing. The story of Moses and Pharaoh
acts as encouragement to the Prophet and a warning to the disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the forceful chargers a 2 raring to go, 3 sweeping ahead at full
stretch, 4 overtaking swiftly 5 to bring the matter to an end, 6 on the
Day when the blast reverberates 7 and the second blast follows,
8 hearts will tremble 9 and eyes will be downcast. 10 They b say, ‘What?
shall we be brought back to life, 11 after we have turned into decayed
bones?’ and they say, 12 ‘Such a return is impossible!’ c 13 But all it will
take is a single blast, 14 and they will be back above ground.
15 Have you [Prophet] heard the story of Moses? 16 His Lord called
out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa: 17 ‘Go to Pharaoh, for he has
exceeded all bounds, 18 and ask him, “Do you want to purify yourself
[of sin]? 19 Do you want me to guide you to your Lord, so that you may
hold Him in awe?” ’ 20 Moses showed him the great sign, 21 but he
denied it and refused [the faith]. 22 He turned away and hastily 23 gathered his people, proclaiming, 24 ‘I am your supreme lord,’ 25 so God
condemned him to punishment in the life to come as well as in this life:
26 there truly is a lesson in this for anyone who stands in awe of God.
27 Which is harder to create: you people or the sky that He built,
28 raising it high and perfecting it, 29 giving darkness to its night and
bringing out its morning brightness, 30 and the earth, too, He spread
out, 31 bringing waters and pastures out of it, 32 and setting ﬁrm
mountains [in it] 33 for you and your animals to enjoy? 34 When the
a There are various interpretations of nazi at. One is that they are angels coming to
take the souls at death, which is a ﬁtting oath, as this is a fearful event that cannot be
avoided, just as the hour of doom cannot be avoided. Another is that they are horses
going out on a military expedition, making the hearts of the enemy tremble. In my
opinion this is the most likely (see Sura 100). The suddenness and feeling of alarm in
this scene is a symbolic anticipation of the suddenness and shock that will accompany
the end of the world.
b The disbelievers of Mecca.
c Or (mockingly) ‘That would be a losing return!’.

408

The Qur an

79: 35

great overwhelming event arrives 35 on the Day that man remembers
what he has done 36 and Hell is there for all to see, 37 for anyone who
has transgressed 38 and preferred the present life 39 Hell will be
home; 40 for anyone who feared the meeting with his Lord and
restrained himself from base desires, 41 Paradise will be home.
42 They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, 43 saying, ‘When will it
arrive?’, but how can you tell [them that]? 44 Its time is known only to
your Lord; 45 you are only sent to warn those who fear it. 46 On the
Day they see it, it will seem they lingered [in this life] an evening [at
most,] or its morning. a
a

Cf. 46: 35.

80. HE FROWNED
A Meccan sura. While the Prophet was speaking to some disbelieving notables,
hoping to convert them, a blind Muslim man came up to learn from him, but in
his eagerness to attract the disbelievers to Islam, the Prophet frowned at
him. The Prophet is then reproached and told not to concern himself with
the disbelievers. In the second paragraph there is a condemnation of man’s
ingratitude: man becomes self-satisﬁed and forgets his origin and his ﬁnal
return to God.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 He frowned and turned away 2 when the blind man came to him––
3 for all you know, a he might have grown in spirit, 4 or taken note of
something useful to him. 5 For the self-satisﬁed one 6 you go out of
your way––7 though you are not to be blamed for his lack of spiritual
growth––8 but from the one who has come to you full of eagerness
9 and awe 10 you allow yourself to be distracted. 11 No indeed! This
[Qur an] is a lesson 12 from which those who wish to be taught should
learn, 13 [written] on honoured, 14 exalted, pure pages, 15 by the hands
of 16 noble and virtuous scribes.
17 Woe to man! How ungrateful he is! 18 From what thing does God
create him? 19 He creates him from a droplet, He proportions him,
20 He makes the way easy for him, 21 then He causes him to die and be
buried. 22 When He wills, He will raise him up again. 23 Yet man b
does not fulﬁl God’s commands. 24 Let man consider the food he
eats! 25 We c pour down abundant water 26 and cause the soil to split
open. 27 We make grain grow, 28 and vines, fresh vegetation, 29 olive
trees, date palms, 30 luscious gardens, 31 fruits, and fodder: 32 all for
you and your livestock to enjoy.
33 When the Deafening Blast comes––34 the Day man will ﬂee from
his own brother, 35 his mother, his father, 36 his wife, his children:
a The shift from talking about the Prophet to addressing him directly reinforces the
reproach.
b Some commentators take this to refer only to disbelievers.
c This is a shift to the plural of divine majesty to emphasize the magnitude of the
action; see iltifat in Introduction, p. xx.

410

The Qur an

80: 37

37 each of them will be absorbed in concerns of their own on that
Day–– 38 on that Day some faces will be beaming, 39 laughing, and
rejoicing, 40 but some faces will be dust-stained 41 and covered in
darkness: 42 those are the disbelievers, the licentious.

81. SHROUDED IN DARKNESS
A Meccan sura stressing the fact that people will be confronted by their deeds on
Judgement Day, asserting the truth of the Qur an, and calling people to the
right path. It opens with a powerful description of events on that Day, and the
title of the sura is taken from this description.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When the sun is shrouded in darkness, 2 when the stars are dimmed,
3 when the mountains are set in motion, 4 when pregnant camels are
abandoned, 5 when wild beasts are herded together, 6 when the seas
boil over, 7 when souls are sorted into classes, 8 when the baby girl
buried alive is asked 9 for what sin she was killed, a 10 when the records
of deeds are spread open, 11 when the sky is stripped away, 12 when
Hell is made to blaze 13 and Paradise brought near: 14 then every soul
will know what it has brought about.
15 I swear by the planets 16 that recede, move, and hide, 17 by the
night that descends, 18 by the dawn that softly breathes: 19 this is the
speech of a noble messenger, b 20 who possesses great strength and is
held in honour by the Lord of the Throne––21 he is obeyed there and
worthy of trust. 22 Your companion c is not mad: 23 he did see him d on
the clear horizon. 24 He does not withhold what is revealed to him
from beyond. 25 This is not the word of an outcast devil.
26 So where are you [people] going? 27 This is a message for all
people; 28 for those who wish to take the straight path. 29 But you will
only wish to do so by the will of God, the Lord of all people.
Cf. 16: 58–9. The pagan Arab habit of female infanticide.
Gabriel.
c Addressed to the Meccans. The companion is the Prophet.
d Gabriel.
a
b

(412)

82. TORN APART
A Meccan sura dealing with man’s ingratitude and his failure to concede that
the Day of Judgement will come. Again, the sura opens with a powerful
description of events on the Day of Judgement and the title is taken from this
description.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When the sky is torn apart, 2 when the stars are scattered, 3 when the
seas burst forth, 4 when graves turn inside out: 5 each soul will know
what it has done and what it has left undone. 6 Mankind, what has
lured you away from God, 7 your generous Lord, who created you,
shaped you, proportioned you, 8 in whatever form He chose? 9 Yet
you still take the Judgement to be a lie! 10 Over you stand 11 watchers,
noble recorders 12 who know what you do: 13 the good will live in bliss,
14 and the wicked will burn in the Fire. 15 They will enter it on the
Day of Judgement 16 and they will ﬁnd no escape. 17 What will explain
to you what the Day of Judgement is? 18 Yes! What will explain to you
what the Day of Judgement is? 19 The Day when no soul will be able
to do anything for another; on that Day, command will belong to
God. a
a

Or ‘everything is up to God’.

(413)

83. THOSE WHO GIVE SHORT MEASURE
A Meccan sura. The practice of cheating appears to have been prevalent
in Mecca, and is strongly condemned here and elsewhere in the Qur an (e.g.
11: 84–8; 7: 85). In the sura the fate of the cheats and disbelievers is
contrasted with the delight in store for the good.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Woe to those who give short measure, 2 who demand of other people
full measure for themselves, 3 but give less than they should when it
is they who weigh or measure for others! 4 Do these people not
realize that they will be raised up 5 on a mighty Day, 6 a Day when
everyone will stand before the Lord of the Worlds? 7 No indeed! The
list of the wicked is in Sijjin a ––8 what will explain to you what Sijjin
is?––9 a clearly numbered list. 10 Woe on that day to the deniers,
11 those who deny the Day of Judgement! 12 Only the evil aggressor
denies it: 13 when Our revelations are recited to him, he says,
‘Ancient fables!’ 14 No indeed! Their hearts are encrusted with what
they have done. 15 No indeed! On that Day they will be screened oﬀ
from their Lord, 16 they will burn in Hell, 17 and they will be told,
‘This is what you called a lie.’
18 No indeed! The list of the truly good is in  Illiyyin b ––19 what
will explain to you what  Illiyyin is?––20 a clearly written list, 21 witnessed by those brought near. c 22 The truly good will live in bliss,
23 seated on couches, gazing around. 24 You will recognize on their
faces the radiance of bliss. 25 They will be served a sealed nectar, 26 its
seal [perfumed with] a fragrant herb d ––let those who strive, strive
for this––27 mixed with the water of Tasnim, e 28 a spring from which
those brought near will drink. 29 The wicked used to laugh at the
believers––30 they would wink at one another when the believers
a The root of this word, s–j–n, is the same as the one for sijn meaning ‘prison’. The
form is intensive.
b The root of this word,  –l–w, relates to height. The form is intensive.
c The elect. See also verse 28.
d One meaning of misk (also ‘musk’).
e The root of this word, s–n–m, suggests height and opulence.

414

The Qur an

83: 31

passed by them, 31 joke about them when they got back to their own
people, 32 and say, when they saw them, ‘These people are misguided,’
33 though they were not sent to be their keepers–– 34 so today a the
believers are laughing at the disbelievers 35 as they sit on couches,
gazing around. 36 Have the disbelievers [not] been repaid for their
deeds?
a

This is in the present tense, as if described on that Day.

(415)

84. RIPPED APART
A Meccan sura dealing with the inevitability of man’s meeting with his Lord
on the Day of Judgement. The obedience of the sky and earth is contrasted with
the disobedience of the disbelievers. The reaction of the believers and of the
disbelievers on the Day of Judgement is described. The title is taken from
the description of events on that Day in the opening verse.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When the sky is ripped apart, 2 obeying its Lord as it rightly must,
3 when the earth is levelled out, 4 casts out its contents, and becomes
empty, 5 obeying its Lord as it rightly must, 6 you humans, toiling
laboriously towards your Lord, will meet Him: 7 whoever is given his
record in his right hand 8 will have an easy reckoning 9 and return to
his people well pleased, 10 but whoever is given his record from
behind his back 11 will cry out for destruction––12 he will burn in the
blazing Fire. 13 He used to live among his people well pleased. 14 He
thought he would never return [to his Lord]––15 indeed he will! His
Lord was watching him. 16 I swear by the glow of sunset, 17 by the
night and what it covers, 18 by the full moon, 19 you will progress from
stage to stage. a
20 So why do they not believe? 21 Why, when the Qur an is read
to them, do they not prostrate themselves [to God]? 22 No! The
disbelievers reject the Qur an––23 God knows best what they keep
hidden inside––24 so give them news of a painful torment. 25 But
those who believe and do good deeds will have a never-ending
reward.
a As the sun sets, followed by darkness, which is then illuminated by the moon, you
will move by stages from death to resurrection.

(416)

85. THE TOWERING CONSTELLATIONS
This Meccan sura strengthened the heart of the Prophet and his followers by
referring to the fate of those who tortured earlier believers. The title expresses
God’s power over the whole universe, from the stars in the sky to the evildoers
referred to in this sura. Indeed, His all-encompassing power is a recurring
theme throughout the sura.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the sky with its towering constellations, 2 by the promised Day,
3 by the Witness a and that which is witnessed, 4 damned were the
makers of the trench, b 5 the makers of the fuel-stoked ﬁre! 6 They
sat down 7 to watch what they were doing to the believers. 8 Their
only grievance against them was their faith in God, the Mighty, the
Praiseworthy, 9 to whom all control over the heavens and earth
belongs: God is witness over all things.
10 For those who persecute believing men and women, and do not
repent afterwards, there will be the torment of Hell and burning.
11 But for those who believe and do good deeds there will be Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams: that is the great triumph. 12 [Prophet],
your Lord’s punishment is truly stern––13 it is He who brings people
to life, and will restore them to life again––14 and He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Loving. 15 The Glorious Lord of the Throne,
16 He does whatever He will. 17 Have you [not] heard the stories of the
forces 18 of Pharaoh and Thamud? 19 Yet still the disbelievers persist
in denial. 20 God surrounds them all.
21 This is truly a glorious Qur an 22 [written] on a preserved Tablet. c
a

God.
Various suggestions are made as to who these trench-makers were, among others,
that they were those commanded to make a trench by a Jewish ruler of sixth-century
Yemen in order to torture Christians, also that the passage could refer to Nimrod’s
treatment of Abraham (Razi).
c God keeps this with Him.
b

(417)

86. THE NIGHT-COMER
A Meccan sura that focuses on a series of examples of things coming out: the
piercing night-star, spurting semen, the baby that bursts out of the womb,
and plants that sprout out of the ground. All of these are used to illustrate
resurrection from the grave.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the sky and the night-comer––2 What will explain to you what
the night-comer is? 3 The piercing star––4 there is a watcher over
every soul.
5 Man should reﬂect on what he was created from. 6 He is created
from spurting ﬂuid, 7 then he a emerges from between the backbone
and breastbone: b 8 God is certainly able to bring him back to life. 9 On
the Day when secrets are laid bare 10 he will have no power and no
one to help him.
11 By the sky and its recurring rain, 12 by the earth that cracks
open! c 13 This is truly a decisive statement; 14 it is not something to be
taken lightly. 15 They plot and scheme, 16 but so do I: 17 [Prophet], let
the disbelievers be, let them be for a while.
The pronoun here is taken to refer to the person rather than the ﬂuid.
Of the mother, where she carries the baby. He emerges from the womb as he will
emerge from the grave.
c For plants to come out, and humans on the Day of Resurrection.
a
b

(418)

87. THE MOST HIGH
A Meccan sura reassuring the Prophet that God will help him and urging him
to continue with his mission. The temporary nature of this world is highlighted
through mention of the short life of green pasture (cf. 10: 24; 18: 45).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 [Prophet], glorify the name of your Lord the Most High, 2 who
created [all things] in due proportion; 3 who determined their destinies and guided them; 4 who brought out the green pasture 5 then
made it dark debris. 6 [Prophet], We shall teach you [the Qur an] and
you will not forget––7 unless God wishes; He knows both what is
open and what is hidden––8 We shall show you the easy way. a 9 So
remind, if reminding will help. b 10 Those who stand in awe of God
will heed the reminder, 11 but it will be ignored by the most wicked,
12 who will enter the Great Fire, 13 where they will neither die nor
live. c 14 Prosperous are those who purify themselves, 15 remember the
name of their Lord, and pray. 16 Yet you [people] prefer the life of
this world, 17 even though the Hereafter is better and more lasting.
18 All this is in the earlier scriptures, 19 the scriptures of Abraham and
Moses.
a

Or ‘We shall make things easy for you’ Literally: ‘We shall ease you towards ease’.
Razi cites many instances in the Qur an where this structure conveys the meaning
‘warn [everyone], whether [or not] warning will help’.
c They will neither be granted the respite of death, nor be able to enjoy their
continued state of life (Razi).
b

(419)

88. THE OVERWHELMING EVENT
This Meccan sura serves to warn the disbelievers, encourage the Prophet and
the believers, and absolve him of responsibility for the disbelievers. The title
comes from the description of events on the Day of Judgement in the ﬁrst verse,
and the downcast faces of the disbelievers on that Day are contrasted with the
radiant faces of the believers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Have you heard tell a [Prophet] about the Overwhelming Event?
2 On that Day, there will be downcast faces, 3 toiling and weary, 4 as
they enter the blazing Fire 5 and are forced to drink from a boiling
spring, 6 with no food for them except bitter dry thorns 7 that neither
nourish nor satisfy hunger. 8 On that Day there will also be faces
radiant with bliss, 9 well pleased with their labour, 10 in a lofty garden,
11 where they will hear no idle talk, 12 with a ﬂowing spring, 13 raised
couches, 14 goblets placed before them, 15 cushions set in rows, 16 and
carpets spread. 17 Do the disbelievers not see how rain clouds b are
formed, 18 how the heavens are lifted, 19 how the mountains are raised
high, 20 how the earth is spread out?
21 So [Prophet] warn them: your only task is to give warning, 22 you
are not there to control them. 23 As for those who turn away and
disbelieve, God will inﬂict the greatest torment upon them. It is to
Us they will return, 24 and then it is for Us to call them to account.
a

An Arabic convention to draw attention to what follows.
The word ibl can mean ‘camel’ as well as ‘rain cloud’. However, the latter is better in
this context amongst all the other geographical images presented. Rain is often used to
illustrate the concept of resurrection.
b

(420)

89. DAYBREAK
A Meccan sura in which God emphasizes (by oath) that the tyrants of the
Prophet’s time will be like those He dealt with in the past. The sura compares
the destiny of the ungrateful with that of the souls at peace.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the Daybreak, 2 by the Ten Nights, a 3 by the even and the odd, b
4 by the passing night c ––5 is this oath strong enough for a rational
person?
6 Have you [Prophet] considered how your Lord dealt with [the
people] of  Ad, d 7 of Iram, [the city] of lofty pillars, 8 whose like has
never been made in any land, 9 and the Thamud, e who hewed into
the rocks in the valley, 10 and the mighty and powerful f Pharaoh?
11 All of them committed excesses in their lands, 12 and spread corruption there: 13 your Lord let a scourge of punishment loose on
them. 14 Your Lord is always watchful.
15 [The nature of] man g is that, when his Lord tries him through
honour and blessings, he says, ‘My Lord has honoured me,’ 16 but
when He tries him through the restriction of his provision, he says,
‘My Lord has humiliated me.’ 17 No indeed! You [people] do not
honour orphans, 18 you do not urge one another to feed the poor,

a This refers to the ﬁrst ten nights of the month of Dhu ’l-Hijjah, sacred before and
after the Prophet’s time, which culminate in the Hajj pilgrimage.
b This has been interpreted in many ways: as a reference to numbers (as translated
here); or e.g. as the multiple (God’s creation) and the One (God Himself).
c The complement of this oath is left unmentioned, to be understood from what
follows. The commentators use this to complete the oath with ‘they will be punished’
based on the context of what follows. The omission reinforces the oath, as one has to
think more carefully in order to grasp it, a device known in Arabic rhetoric as hadhf
al-jawab (cf. 38: 1; 50: 1).
d See 26: 123 ﬀ.
e See 26: 141 ﬀ.
f Dhu’l-awtad, ‘of the stakes’, is explained as a Bedouin expression conveying
strength and power. Another interpretation is that Pharaoh used stakes as implements of
torture.
g Insan ‘man’ occurs sixty-ﬁve times in the Qur an. It applies to both men and
women, as of course does the generic ‘man’ in English.

89: 30

Daybreak

421

19 you consume inheritance a greedily, 20 and you love wealth with a
passion. 21 No indeed! When the earth is pounded to dust, pounded
and pounded, 22 when your Lord comes with the angels, rank upon
rank, 23 when Hell is that Day brought near–– on that Day man will
take heed, but what good will that be to him then? 24 He will say,
‘Would that I had provided for this life to come!’ 25 On that Day, no
one will punish as He punishes, 26 and no one will bind as He binds.
27 ‘[But] you, soul at peace: b 28 return to your Lord well pleased and
well pleasing; 29 go in among My servants; 30 and into My Garden.’
a This could refer to the inheritance of orphans (see 4: 2 and 4: 10) or inheritance
generally.
b At peace through remembering God in this life and the next (cf. 13: 28), unlike the
disbeliever who only takes heed on the Day of Judgement, when it will not beneﬁt him.
There is iltifat here: the sinners are mentioned in the third person while the honoured
are addressed directly by their Lord.

(422)

90. THE CITY
Revealed in Mecca. The point of this sura is that man is created to work and
be judged. He should therefore seek to do good deeds rather than indulge in
arrogance and wastefulness.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 I swear by this city a ––2 and you [Prophet] are an inhabitant b of this
city––3 [I swear] by parent and oﬀspring, 4 that We have created man
for toil and trial. 5 Does he think that no one will have power over
him? 6 ‘I have squandered great wealth,’ he says. 7 Does he think no
one observes him? 8 Did We not give him eyes, 9 a tongue, lips, 10 and
point out to him the two clear ways [of good and evil]? 11 Yet he has
not attempted the steep path. 12 What will explain to you what the
steep path is? 13 It is to free a slave, 14 to feed at a time of hunger 15 an
orphaned relative 16 or a poor person in distress, 17 and to be one of
those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion. 18 Those who do this will be on the right-hand side, 19 but those
who disbelieve in Our revelations will be on the left-hand side, 20 and
the Fire will close in on them.
a

Mecca.
Hillun bi can mean ‘fair game’ for the disbelievers, even in this inviolable city,
‘resident’, ‘free to live’; some see that it means the Prophet is a temporary resident,
others that it prophesies his return after emigration to Medina.
b

(423)

91. THE SUN
A Meccan sura, the central theme of which is purifying or corrupting the soul,
with the tribe of Thamud given as an example of corruption.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the sun in its morning brightness 2 and by the moon as it follows
it, 3 by the day as it displays the sun’s glory 4 and by the night as it
conceals it, 5 by the sky and how He built it 6 and by the earth and
how He spread it, 7 by the soul and how He formed it 8 and inspired it
[to know] its own rebellion and piety! 9 The one who puriﬁes his soul
succeeds 10 and the one who corrupts it fails. 11 In their arrogant
cruelty, the people of Thamud a called [their messenger] a liar,
12 when the most wicked man among them rose [against him]. b 13 The
messenger of God said to them, ‘[Leave] God’s camel to drink,’
14 but they called him a liar and hamstrung her. Their Lord destroyed
them for their crime and levelled them. 15 He did not hesitate c to
punish d them.
See e.g. 7: 73–9 (on the tribe of Thamud).
Cf. 54: 29.
c Literally ‘he does not fear’.
d One of the lexical meanings of  uqba is jaza , here ‘to punish’; or ‘does not fear the
consequences’.
a
b

(424)

92. THE NIGHT
A Meccan sura showing the consequences of the paths people choose and
emphasizing God’s guidance and warning.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the enshrouding night, 2 by the radiant day, 3 by His creation a of
male and female! 4 The ways you take diﬀer greatly. 5 There is the one
who gives, who is mindful of God, 6 who testiﬁes to goodness––7 We
shall smooth his way towards ease. 8 There is the one who is miserly,
who is self-satisﬁed, 9 who denies goodness––10 We shall smooth his
way towards hardship 11 and his wealth will not help him as he falls. b
12 Our part is to provide guidance––13 this world and the next
belong to Us––14 so I warn you about the raging Fire, 15 in which
none but the most wicked one will burn, 16 who denied [the truth],
and turned away. 17 The most pious one will be spared this––18 who
gives his wealth away as self-puriﬁcation, 19 not to return a favour to
anyone 20 but for the sake of his Lord the Most High c ––21 and he will
be well pleased.
a

Or ‘by Him who created . . .’.
Or ‘what use will his wealth be to him when he falls?’.
c Literally ‘for the sake of the Face of his Lord’.
b

(425)

93. THE MORNING BRIGHTNESS
An early Meccan sura addressed to the Prophet, to reassure him, when he had
not received revelation for some time, that his Lord had not forsaken him.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the morning brightness 2 and by the night when it grows still,
3 your Lord has not forsaken you [Prophet], nor does He hate
you, 4 and the future will be better for you than the past; 5 your
Lord is sure to give you so much that you will be well satisﬁed.
6 Did He not ﬁnd you an orphan and shelter you? 7 Did He not ﬁnd
you lost and guide you? 8 Did He not ﬁnd you in need and make you
self-suﬃcient?
9 So do not be harsh with the orphan 10 and do not chide the one
who asks for help; 11 talk about the blessings of your Lord.

(426)

94. RELIEF
This Meccan sura, addressed to the Prophet, is a continuation of the
reassurance and encouragement given in Sura 93.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Did We not relieve your heart for you [Prophet], 2 and remove the
burden 3 that weighed so heavily on your back, 4 and raise your
reputation high? 5 So truly where there is hardship there is also ease;
6 truly where there is hardship there is also ease. 7 The moment you
are freed [of one task] work on, 8 and turn to your Lord for
everything.

(427)

95. THE FIG
A Meccan sura questioning how man can deny the Judgement, and emphasizing the importance of faith and good deeds.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the ﬁg, by the olive, 2 by Mount Sinai, 3 by this safe town, a
4 We create man in the ﬁnest state 5 then reduce him to the lowest of
the low, 6 except those who believe and do good deeds––7 they will
have an unfailing reward. After this, what makes you [man] deny the
Judgement? b 8 Is God not the most decisive of judges? c
a

Mecca.
Or ‘who could say that you [Prophet] are lying about the Judgement?’ (Razi)
c God would not create you and leave you without Judgement (cf. 23: 115–6).
b

(428)

96. THE CLINGING FORM a
A Meccan sura named after the term  alaq in verse 2. The ﬁrst ﬁve verses are
known to be the ﬁrst revelation of the Qur an when the Prophet was instructed
to read. The second part came later to show that man transgresses when he
becomes self-satisﬁed (as exempliﬁed by a speciﬁc individual, Abu Jahl).

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Read! In the name of your Lord who created: 2 He created man b
from a clinging form. 3 Read! Your Lord is the Most Bountiful One
4 who taught by [means of] the pen, 5 who taught man what he did
not know.
6 But man exceeds all bounds 7 when he thinks he is self-suﬃcient:
8 [Prophet], all will return to your Lord. 9 Have you seen the man
who forbids 10 [Our] servant to pray? 11 Have you seen whether he is
rightly guided, 12 or encourages true piety? 13 Have you seen whether
he denies the truth and turns away from it? 14 Does he not realize that
God sees all? 15 No! If he does not stop, We shall drag him by his
forehead c ––16 his lying, sinful forehead. 17 Let him summon his comrades; 18 We shall summon the guards of Hell. 19 No! Do not obey him
[Prophet]: bow down d in worship and draw close.
a A stage in the development of a foetus (cf. 22: 5), i.e. embryo.  Alaq can also mean
anything that clings: a clot of blood, a leech, even a lump of mud. All these meanings
involve the basic idea of clinging or sticking. Clinging indicates a state of total dependence in contrast with verse 7.
b See note to 89: 15.
c In Hell. Many translators give ‘forelock’ instead of ‘forehead’ (cf. 54: 48). His head
is sinful, not his forelock.
d Sujud is a position in the Muslim prayer with head, hands, knees, and toes on the
ground, but not the rest of the body as in ‘prostration’.

(429)

97. THE NIGHT OF GLORY
This Meccan sura celebrates the night when the ﬁrst revelation of the Qur an
was sent down.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 We sent it down on the Night of Glory. 2 What will explain to you
what that Night of Glory is? 3 The Night of Glory is better than a
thousand months; 4 on that night the angels and the Spirit a descend
again and again with their Lord’s permission on every task; 5 [there
is] peace that night until the break of dawn.
a

The Angel Gabriel.

(430)

98. CLEAR EVIDENCE
A Medinan sura that takes its title from the clear evidence demanded by the
disbelievers before they will believe. It spells out the basic tenets of faith, and
contrasts the Fire of Hell with the lasting bliss that will be enjoyed by the
faithful.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and the idolaters were not about to change their ways until they were sent clear
evidence, 2 a messenger from God, reading out pages [blessed with]
purity, 3 containing true scriptures. 4 [Yet] those who were given the
Scripture became divided only after they were sent [such] clear evidence 5 though all they are ordered to do is worship God alone,
sincerely devoting their religion to Him as people of true faith, keep
up the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, for that is the true
religion. 6 Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and
the idolaters will have the Fire of Hell, there to remain. They are the
worst of creation.
7 Those who believe and do good deeds are the best of creation.
8 Their reward with their Lord is everlasting Gardens graced with
ﬂowing streams, where they will stay forever. God is well pleased
with them and they with Him. All this is for those who stand in awe
of their Lord.

(431)

99. THE EARTHQUAKE
A Medinan sura, one of a series of suras that deal with scenes from the Day of
Judgement. Compare Suras 81, 82, 101, and others.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When the earth is shaken violently in its [last] quaking, 2 when the
earth throws out its burdens, a 3 when man cries, ‘What is happening
to it?’; 4 on that Day, it will tell all 5 because your Lord will inspire it
[to do so]. 6 On that Day, people will come forward in separate
groups to be shown their deeds: 7 whoever has done an atom’s-weight
of good will see it, 8 but whoever has done an atom’s-weight of evil
will see that.
a

This refers to the dead being thrown out of their graves.

(432)

100. THE CHARGING STEEDS
An early Meccan sura in which God swears by the warhorses He has subjected
to man’s use a that man is ungrateful and misguided.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the charging steeds that pant 2 and strike sparks with their
hooves, 3 who make dawn raids, 4 raising a cloud of dust, 5 and plunging
into the midst of the enemy, 6 man is ungrateful to his Lord––7 and
He is witness to this b ––8 he is truly excessive in his love of wealth.
9 Does he not know that when the contents of graves burst forth,
10 when the secrets of hearts are uncovered, on that Day, 11 their Lord
will be fully aware of them all?
Cf. 36: 71–2; 43: 12–13.
Or man will by his own actions be a witness against himself on the Day of
Judgement.
a
b

(433)

101. THE CRASHING BLOW
A Meccan sura which gives some scenes from the Resurrection and Judgement.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 The Crashing Blow! 2 What is the Crashing Blow? 3 What will
explain to you what the Crashing Blow is? 4 On a Day when people
will be like scattered moths 5 and the mountains like tufts of wool,
6 the one whose good deeds are heavy on the scales 7 will have a
pleasant life, 8 but the one whose good deeds are light 9 will have the
Bottomless Pit for his home a ––10 what will explain to you what that
is?––11 a blazing ﬁre.
a

Literally ‘his mother is the bottomless pit’.

(434)

102. STRIVING FOR MORE
A Meccan sura which criticizes man’s preoccupation with worldly wealth and
stresses that he will be brought to account on the Day of Resurrection.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Striving for more distracts you 2 until you go into your graves. a 3 No
indeed! You will come to know. 4 No indeed! In the end you will come
to know. 5 No indeed! If only you knew for certain. 6 You will most
deﬁnitely see Hellﬁre, 7 you will see it with the eye of certainty. 8 On
that Day, you will be asked about your pleasures.
a Literally ‘until you visit the graves’. Their stay in the grave is like a short visit (cf.
46: 35).

(435)

103. THE DECLINING DAY a
A Meccan sura showing the way to salvation. The image of a declining day
suggests the stage in the day, or in life, when only a short while is left for those
wishing to make up for lost time.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 By the declining day, 2 man is [deep] in loss, 3 except for those who
believe, do good deeds, urge one another to the truth, and urge one
another to steadfastness.
a

Other interpretations of the title include ‘Time’ and ‘The Flight of Time’.

(436)

104. THE BACKBITER
A Meccan sura that condemns the greedy backbiter and gives a description of
Hell.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Woe to every fault-ﬁnding backbiter a 2 who amasses riches, counting them over, 3 thinking they will make him live for ever. 4 No
indeed! He will be thrust into the Crusher! 5 What will explain to you
what the Crusher is? 6 It is God’s Fire, made to blaze, 7 which rises
over people’s hearts. 8 It closes in on them 9 in towering columns. b
a Said to refer either to al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq or to al-Walid ibn al-Mughira (cf.
note to 74: 11).
b Cf. 77: 30–3.

(437)

105. THE ELEPHANT
This sura is a reference to events that happened in 570 ce, the year of the
Prophet’s birth, when the army of Abraha (a Christian ruler of Yemen),
which included war elephants, marched to attack Mecca, destroy the Ka ba,
and divert pilgrims to the new cathedral in San a. The destruction of this
army is cited here to encourage the believers and warn the disbelievers.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Do you [Prophet] not see how your Lord dealt with the army of the
elephant? 2 Did He not utterly confound their plans? 3 He sent ranks
of birds against them, 4 pelting them with pellets of hard-baked clay:
5 He made them [like] cropped stubble.

(438)

106. QURAYSH
This Meccan sura connects grammatically with the previous one’s account of
how God defeated the threat to Mecca posed by Abraha, so making it safe for
the tribe of Quraysh to continue their trading journeys.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 [He did this] to make the Quraysh feel secure, a 2 secure in their
winter and summer journeys. b 3 So let them worship the Lord of this
House: c 4 who provides them with food to ward oﬀ hunger, safety to
ward oﬀ fear.
a Or ‘so that their covenants of security [from their neighbours should continue]’ or
‘so that they should remain accustomed to their trade journeys, and not stop them’.
b Their two annual trade caravans––to Yemen in winter and to Syria in summer––on
which the prosperity of the Quraysh depended.
c The Ka ba.

(439)

107. COMMON KINDNESSES
A Meccan sura describing some characteristics of a person who denies the
Judgement.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 [Prophet], have you considered the person who denies the Judgement? 2 It is he who pushes aside the orphan 3 and does not urge
others to feed the needy. 4 So woe to those who pray 5 but are heedless
of their prayer; 6 those who are all show 7 and forbid common
kindnesses.

(440)

108. ABUNDANCE
When the Prophet lost his last son, an opponent who hated him taunted him
with being ‘cut oﬀ ’ without posterity. This Meccan sura comes to reassure the
Prophet and as a retort to his enemy.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 We have truly given abundance a to you [Prophet]––2 so pray to your
Lord and make your sacriﬁce to Him alone––3 it is the one who hates
you who has been cut oﬀ.
a The word kawthar, ‘abundance’, is also interpreted here as referring to a speciﬁc
river in Paradise.

(441)

109. THE DISBELIEVERS
Some of the Meccan idolaters suggested to the Prophet as a compromise that he
should worship their gods for a year and they should worship his for a year. This
was the reply.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Say [Prophet], ‘Disbelievers: 2 I do not worship what you worship,
3 you do not worship what I worship, 4 I will never worship what you
worship, 5 you will never worship what I worship: a 6 you have your
religion and I have mine.’
a

If you keep to your present gods (see Zamakhshari, al-Kashshaf, vol. iv).

(442)

110. HELP
A Medinan sura said to be one of the last revelations the Prophet received
before his death.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 When God’s help comes and He opens up a your way [Prophet],
2 when you see people embracing God’s faith in crowds, 3 celebrate
the praise of your Lord and ask His forgiveness: He is always ready
to accept repentance.
a This sura is mainly understood by interpreters to refer to the surrender of Mecca to
the Prophet. Accordingly many translate the word fath as ‘victory’, although there was
no ﬁghting. See also Sura 48, Surat al-Fath. Fath in classical Arabic means ‘opening’ or
‘decision’. In a prayer, the Prophet says, ‘Lord, open the gates of your Mercy for me.’
Sura 1 is called al-Fatiha, as it opens the Qur an. In 7: 89, iftah means ‘decide between us
and our enemy’.

(443)

111. PALM FIBRE
This sura refers to an uncle of the Prophet who opposed him ﬁercely, as did
his wife. He insulted the Prophet with ‘ Tabbak yadak’ (‘may your hands be
ruined’). This Meccan sura is the retort.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 May the hands of Abu Lahab be ruined! May he be ruined too!
2 Neither his wealth nor his gains will help him: 3 he will burn in the
Flaming Fire–– a 4 and so will his wife, the ﬁrewood-carrier, b 5 with a
palm-ﬁbre rope around her neck.
a

Abu Lahab means ‘Flame Man’ and this verse contains a pun on this name.
She used to tie bunches of thorns with ropes of twisted palm ﬁbre and throw them
into the Prophet’s path.
b

(444)

112. PURITY [OF FAITH]
This sura is unusual in having as its title a term not mentioned in the body of
the sura. Ikhlas conveys the meaning of sincerity in one’s religion and total
dedication to the One true God. Because of the importance of this theme in
Islam, the Prophet said that this sura, despite its brevity, was equal to one-third
of the Qur an.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Say, ‘He is God the One, 2 God the eternal. a 3 He begot no one nor
was He begotten. 4 No one is comparable to Him.’
a Samad: other commonly held interpretations include ‘self-suﬃcient’ and ‘sought
by all’ (Razi).

(445)

113. DAYBREAK
A Meccan sura used as an invocation against evil.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Say [Prophet], ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of daybreak 2 against the
harm in what He has created, 3 the harm in the night when darkness
gathers, 4 the harm in witches when they blow on knots, a 5 the harm
in the envier when he envies.’
a

Said to be a means of practising witchcraft and casting spells.

(446)

114. PEOPLE
Another Meccan sura commonly used as an invocation against evil.

In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1 Say, ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of people, 2 the Controller a
of people, 3 the God of people, 4 against the harm of the slinking
whisperer––5 who whispers into the hearts of people––6 whether
they be jinn or people.’
a

Or ‘King’ or ‘Master’.

INDEX
Aaron (Moses’ brother) 104; blessed
288; God’s guidance 86; grace 193; as
messenger 134, 229; mission to the
Egyptians 232; Moses requests his
support from God 247; as Moses’
spokesman 197; receives the
Scriptures 205; rejection by
disbelievers 217; and the worship of
the golden calf 200
Abdul Muttalib (Muhammad’s
grandfather) x, xxxvii
Abdullah (Muhammad’s father) x, xxxvii
Abel (Adam’s son) 70
Abraha (Christian ruler of Yemen),
threatens Mecca 437, 438
Abraham xvii, 122, 348; as an example
368–9; builds the Ka ba x, 17 n. a,
18 n. c; ceases to pray on behalf of his
disbelieving father 126; condemns
idolatry 205–6, 234, 253, 317, and is
blessed with the birth of Isaac 287;
devotion to God 14–15, 16, 292;
dialogue with God xx; as
encouragement to believers to be
mindful of God 359, 361; example
166, 209; faith 41; forbidden to plead
for Lot’s people 141; grace 193;
guests, and the destruction of Lot’s
people 343–4; monotheism 85–6;
prayers for the prosperity of Mecca
158, 160–1; questioning of the
prophecy of Isaac’s birth 163–4;
receives the same message as that given
to Muhammad 312; rite of pilgrimage
209, 211; standing before God 39
Abraham, people 212; chosen by God 37
Abraham, wife, and the prophecy of
Isaac’s birth 141, 343–4
Abu Bakr: father of  A isha 120, 221 n. c,
ﬂees from Mecca and hides in a cave
xxx; Rightly Guided Caliph xiii;
preservation of the Qur an xvi, xxxvii
Abu Hanifa, women permitted to be
judges xxv
Abu Lahab (uncle and opponent of
Muhammad), condemnation 443

Abu Talib (Muhammad’s uncle) x, xi,
xxxvii
 Ad (Hud’s people) 159, 212; arrogance
290; condemnation 254;
wronged themselves 122; destruction
229, 327, 329, 348; disbelief 99,
139–40, as example to those who
disbelieved 340, 344; disbelief 159;
punishment 303, 308, 351;
punishment denied 387; rejection of
Hud 235–6; corruption condemned
420
Adam: angels submit to 94–5; chosen
by God 37; creation and favoured
over the angels 4, 7; disobedience 95,
201; without a father as was
Jesus 34, 38–9
 adhab 5 n. c
adna al-jilbab 271 n. b
adoption 266
adultery 220–1, 221–2; forbidden 177;
marriage rather than adultery 53;
punishments for 71 n. b
advocacy, forbidden in the event of the
betrayal of trust 61
afterlife 67, 82, 87, 285–7; contrast with
temporal life 256
Ahmad (name of Muhammad) 370
 A isha (Muhammad’s wife), accused of
adultery falsely 220, 221
 alaq 428 n. a
Alexander the Great, identiﬁcation with
Dhu ’l-Qarnayn 188 n. a
Ali, Abdullah Ysuf, translation of the
Qur an xxviii, xxxviii
 Ali (Rightly Guided Caliph) xiii
al- alamin 3 n. e
allies, disbelieving relatives not to be
allies [against Muslims] 118
almsgiving xix, 30–2, 120, 177, 259, 422,
424, 425; charitable spending
(yunﬁquna) 5 n. b; commanded before
it is too late 374–5; commendation
61; before conversations between
believers and Muhammad 363;
continuation 221; during pilgrimages

448

Index

almsgiving (cont.):
24; as marks of belief 19; rewards for
377; standing of blood-relatives in calls
upon believers 266
am 346 n. a
Amina (Muhammad’s mother) x, xxxvii
amr xxxi
angels 380; ascent to God 389; blessing
239 n. b; as bringers of justice 162;
creation 277; dealing out of
punishment to disbelievers 333; deny
being worshipped 275; disbelievers’
claims about refuted 347–8; encourage
believers 309; as gatekeepers of Hell
397–8; gender xxxiii, as the daughters
of God 169 n. b, 177, 183 n. a, 195, 204
n. a, denial of the pagan belief 346 n. b,
refutation 191, 285, 288–9, 347 n. g,
348, seen as God’s servants 316–17,
318 n. b, 319; guardian angels 154; lack
of arrogance 169; as messengers of
God 166; prayers for the salvation of
believers 301–2; as receptors of men at
the Day of Judgement 341; record
people’s deeds in writing 384 n. a;
role on the Day of Judgement 228,
387; subordination to Adam 4, 7, 94–5,
163, 179, 186, 201, 293; worshipped as
gods x
anger, attribution 3 n. f
animals: garlanding 77; see also creation;
livestock
ansar xii
anxiety 389
apostasy 24, 63, 173
Arabian peninsula, spread of Islam xiii
Arabic: structures and idioms, eﬀects on
translation xxxi–xxxii; use in the
Qur an for clarity 311, 316, 323, 328;
use in Scripture 307, 310
Arabs: desert Arabs 124, 125, 127,
condemned for disbelief 335,
presumptuousness 339; idolatry 169
n. a, 169 n. b; Meccan Arabs, reactions
to the Qur an 393–4, refusal to believe
revelation of the Qur an through
Muhammad 237; pagan Arabs, divorce
practices disallowed 362 n. a
Arafat 22, 22 n. f
Arberry, Arthur J., translation of the
Qur an xxviii, xxxviii
Ark [of the Covenant] 28

arrogant, condemnation 245
 arsh 136 n. b
Asad, Muhammad (Leopold Weiss),
translation of the Qur an xxviii–xxix,
xxxviii
asbab al-nuzul xxii, xxii n. 16
Ascension to Heaven, and Night Journey
xi, xxxvii, 175, 179, 347
ashfaqtum 363 n. a
 Ashura, Day xiii
‘associate’ xvii
ata 166 n. a
awe, given to God alone 365, 367
awliya xxxi
ayas xvii; contents and construction xxii;
introductory 3 n. c
ayat (signs) of God xvii
Azar (father of Abraham) 85
Badr (battle) xii, xxxvii, 34, 35, 43, 257
n. a; distribution of battle gains 110,
112–13, 115; pagans 366 n. a
bahira 78
bahr 190 n. a
Banu Nadir (Jewish clan) 365, 366–7
Banu Qaynuqa (Jewish clan) 366 n. a
Al-Baqara (sura) 4–33
battle, conduct 111, 113, 114
battle gains, distribution 110, 112–13,
115
bayan 353 n. b
Baydawi xxxv
beliefs; corruption 39; impossibility of
forcing belief 128, 131–2, 135;
Muhammad to recognize that he
cannot compel belief but deliver
God’s message only 311, 314;
refutation of false beliefs of the
polytheists
believers 225, 261, 262; acceptance of the
Qur an 239, 248–9, 430; afterlife 176;
angels pray on their behalf 301–2;
blessings 416, 430; description 389;
and disbelievers 305, alliances with
disbelievers sometimes permitted 36;
encouraged by angels 309;
exhortations to worship of God 214;
fate 94, 96, 97–8, 122, on the Day of
Resurrection 405; forgiveness to
relatives who oppose their faith 376,
377; and God 43–8, as God’s allies
364, God’s guidance of 195, 325,

Index
God’s providence for 158–61, 217, and
God’s revelation 42–3, response to
God 4–6, 18–19, 111–12, solidarity in
defence of God’s cause 370,
submission to God and defence against
Hellﬁre 380–1, urged to spend in
God’s cause and uphold justice
359–61, worship of God 264, 265; and
hypocrites, divisions between on the
Day of Judgement 360; judgement 64,
138; justiﬁcation 243–4; lack of action
criticized 372; mutual respect 338–9;
nature 73, known by God 277, 279,
280; and polytheists 295–9; praised
337; prosperity 224; qualities 227,
230–1; reactions to the Day of
Judgement contrasted with those of
disbelievers 419; record held in their
right hands at the Day of Judgement
387; religious practices in daily life
269; respect towards Muhammad 338;
rewards 35, 45, 155, 210, 212, 213,
251, 265, 269, 271, 272, 277, 279, 313,
326, 370–1, 401–2, 404, at the Day of
Judgement 352, contrasted with the
punishments of disbelievers 387, in
Paradise 185, 190, 286, 321, 322–3,
328, 341, compared to the disbelievers’
life in Hell 345–6, in war for their
faithfulness 335–6; salvation 83 n. b,
207, 221; success 215; supported by
God 304; sustenance by God 256;
testing and constancy 252; to be
attended to in preference to attempts to
convert disbelievers 409; triumph on
the Day of Judgement 418; true
believers 339; see also disbelievers
Benjamin (Joseph’s brother) 150 n. a
bequests 20, 78; payment 51
bi ’l-ghaybi 361 n. a
birth 302 n. a
bribes, forbidden 21
bride-gift 27, 50, 52, 53, 68, 369
broadcasting, use of the Qur an ix–x
brothers: inheritances 66; property
shares 51
burning bush 239–40, 247; revelation to
Moses 196–7
Byzantines 257
Cain (Adam’s son) 70
calendar xi–xii, xxxvii

449

camel: hamstrung by the people of
Thamud 351, 423; sign invoked by
Salih 236
camels, dedication and use 211–12
captives, treatment 115
charity, see almsgiving
chastity 389
children: fathers’ responsibilities for 379;
property shares 51; respect for adults’
privacy 225; weaning when parents
divorce 26–7; see also orphans;
parents; relatives
Children of Israel: as disbelievers 7–14,
23, 103–6, during the desert
wanderings 199–200, of the
Scriptures 143; exodus 134–5, 181,
322; God’s guidance 265; and
kingship 28–9; oppression in Egypt
245, 303; rebelliousness 175; religious
diﬀerences among 325; response to
God 4, 16; worship of calf 104; see also
Jews and Judaism; People of the Book
Christianity x
Christians 9; belief in Muhammad 255
n. a; claims disowned by Jesus on the
Day of Judgement 78–9; factions
among 29; as People of the Book
xviii, and Islamic relations with
xxiv–xxv, xxxvii; relations with
Muslims 34, 39–42, and pledges from
God 67, 68, 69–76; see also People of
the Book
chronology, lack of xvi, xix
combatants, and non-combatants 60
commerce, see trade
common kindnesses, neglect, the result of
denial of Judgement 439
consecration (ihram) 22 n. d
consultation (shura) 311, 314
contexts: eﬀects on understanding
xxx–xxxi, importance for
interpretation of the Qur an xxi–xxii,
xxiv
contrasts xx
the corrupt, identiﬁcation 333
corruption spreaders condemned 245
covetousness 53–4
Crashing Blow 433
creation 203, 204, 209; beneﬁts for man
166–7, 169, 170, 171; days 307; and
God, as the activity of God 223–4,
229–30, 253, 257, 258–9, 295, 296, 357,

450

Index

creation (cont.):
basis in God alone 277, 278, as
evidence of God’s ability to resurrect
the dead 340, 341–2, as illustrative of
God’s power 215, 261, 262–3, 281,
282, as manifestation of the power of
God 264, not to be worshipped in
place of God 309, under God’s
providence 313; levels 305; obedience
on the Day of Judgement contrasted
with the disobedience of disbelievers
415; as promptings to belief 344;
purposeful nature 322; wonders 257,
258–9, 353; see also animals; insects;
nature
dana 118 n. d
daughters: denigration of the birth of
daughters by pagans condemned 346
n. b; property shares 51; regarded as a
disgrace by the pagan Arabs 317,
attributed to God 288 n. c, 347 n. g,
348
David: cited as encouragement to
Muhammad 272, 273; given
knowledge by God 240; given
sovereignty and wisdom by God 29;
God’s guidance 86; prophetic status
178, 206; and the Psalms 65;
repentance when tested 291
Dawood, N. J. xxii n. 17, xxiv, xxxviii;
translation of the Qur an xxviii, xxx
day, and night, as evidence of God’s
creative power 282
Day of Gathering, see Day of Judgement
Day of Judgement 78–9, 78 n. b, 80, 90,
137, 143, 179–80, 181, 186, 187, 200–1,
201–2, 207–8, 209, 213, 213–14, 239,
243–4, 258, 340, 354, 411, 412, 431,
432, 433; arrival 319; barriers between
righteous and the damned 94, 97–8;
condemnation of disbelievers for
arrogance 328; condemnation for
those who give short measure 413–14;
creation’s obedience contrasted with
the disobedience of disbelievers 415; as
the Day of Decision 403–4; denial, by
the disbelievers 272, and its
consequences 439; description 389,
390; disbelievers’ rejections
denounced 227–8; divisions between
believers and disbelievers 259, 260;

divisions between believers and
hypocrites 360; divisions of mankind
356–8; imminence 347, 349;
inevitability 203, 274, 311, 312, 314,
325–6, 345, 346, 387; length 264;
men’s behaviour 409–10; punishment
of the Meccan disbelievers 351–2;
reactions of believers and disbelievers
234–5, 419; reality 285–6; receptors
witness against men 341; signs 350;
timing 343; timing not known to any
save God 271; tyranny condemned
421; see also Day of Resurrection; Final
Judgement
Day of Resurrection 58, 172, 178, 230,
399–400, 405–6; description 299–300,
as being smoke-ﬁlled 321; disbelievers’
regrets 382; fate of disbelievers 296;
fate of the idolaters and the righteous
167–8; judgement and rewards 176;
man’s powerlessness 341; punishment
for the Meccan disbelievers 272; see
also Day of Judgement; Resurrection
days, declining days, and the need for
repentance 435
Days of God 158
dead: disgorged from graves on the Day
of Judgement 431, 432; resurrection
30; see also Resurrection
death 58; determination by God 80, 84;
inevitability 204
debts: conduct regarding 32; payment
51; written records, and women’s
status xxv–xxvi
destiny, God’s control 267
Devil, see Satan
devils, rebellious devils, restraint and
punishment 285–6
devotional practices, relaxation by God as
preparation for the full weight of the
Qur an 395
dhahara 222 n. a
dhakara 27 n. b
dhalama 271 n. b
dhikr 318 n. a
dhira 388 n. a
dhu al-dhikr 290 n. a
dhu ’l-awtad 290 n. d, 420 n. f
Dhu ’l-Hijjah, month 420 n. a
Dhu ’l-Kiﬂ: goodness 292; prophetic
status 207
Dhu ’l-Qarnayn 183, 188–9

Index
dialogue xx
dietary laws 19, 41, 67–8, 76, 76–8, 89,
90–1, 173
disbelievers: activities known to God 136;
alliances with believers, condemnation
363–4, sometimes permitted 36;
amazement at the Resurrection 340;
arguments rejected 227–30; arrogance
contrasted with God’s pride in
creation 324, 326; arrogance linked
with those of previous generations and
of Satan 290–1; attempts to oppose
God and Muhammad futile 331; and
believers 305; belittling of the Qur an
232; challenged as to their questioning
of God’s power over them 382–3;
claim that a true prophet would be
wealthy denied 316, 317–18; claims
about goddesses and angels refuted
347–8; classiﬁcation 353, 354–5;
condemnation 239, 243–4, 410;
abandonment by God 158–61, those
who lead others astray 261;
consignment to Hell 341; denial of the
Day of Judgement 272; destruction
228–9, 231, because of their rejection
of the truth of the Qur an and the
Resurrection 327–8, 329–30;
disobedience, contrasted with the
obedience of creation 415, ordained by
God 187; disputes between the
oppressors and the oppressed at the
Day of Judgement 274–5; disputes in
Hell 293; eternal torment 418;
eventual punishment 202; as evildoers,
fate delayed by God until the Final
Judgement 128–9, 130; as examples to
those who disbelieve currently 340,
341; exhorted to believe 257; failure to
see the signiﬁcance of God’s signs 264;
fate 94, 95–108, 111, 112, 113–14,
122–3, 155–7, on the Day of
Resurrection 405–6; foolishness in
denying the Resurrection 389, 390;
and God’s revelation 42–3; good
actions outweighed by bad faith 331–2;
hearts hardened by God 133–4, 185;
judgement 63–4, 66, 136–43, 203, 205,
207, 207–8; lack of belief in God as
creator 256; lack of success in war
dictated by God 336; life in Hell
compared to the believers’ bliss in

451

Paradise 345–6; misconceptions
regarding revelation and Muhammad’s
nature 252, 255, 256; nature known by
God 277, 280; not to be helped by
believers 251; obduracy 307–9, 310;
prayers ineﬀective 154; punishment
35, 36, 41, 45, 48, 153, 194–5, 210, 212,
215, 216–19, 265, 301, 324, 325–6, 377,
395, 397–8, 402, 403–4, in the afterlife
185, 189–90, for barring believers from
Mecca 209, 211, contrasted with the
rewards of believers 387, on the Day of
Judgement 271, 304, 305, 393, 394,
inevitability 289, for opposition to
God and Muhammad 362, 363, 364, of
previous generations, seen as a warning
to disbelievers in the present 350–1,
shown in the story of Moses 196;
reactions to the Day of Judgement
contrasted with those of believers
419; reactions to the giving of the
Scriptures 24; record held in their
left hands at the Day of Judgement
387–8; rejection of prophets and
punishment 162; relations with God
42–8; reminded of the fate of
previous generations of disbelievers
343–4, 376; repentance, see
repentance; response to God 4, 5–6,
7–14, 18–19; rewards 279, 313,
scoﬃng met with punishment at the
Day of Judgement 285–6, 286–7;
guided by own desires 325;
stubbornness and mocking of God’s
revelations 281–3; terror at the Day
of Judgement 276; as those who are
not in God’s light 223; to be left to
God’s judgement and not to
Muhammad’s preaching 385–6; to be
left to their own devices 409;
torturers condemned 416; unjust
nature 224; see also believers; Meccan
disbelievers; polytheists
disbelieving communities, punishment
379
disputes, arbitration 56–7
divorce xix, 52; attempts at
reconciliation 54; pagan divorce
practices disallowed 362; regulations
278–9; and remarriage 25–8, 266 n. a;
settlements 62–3, 270; and women’s
status xxv; see also marriage

452

Index

doubters, see disbelievers
drawing lots 76
dying 357–8
eating 225
education xiv n. 4; use of the Qur an
ix
Elijah, God’s guidance 86; 288
Elisha, goodness 292
elisions xxxi
Embassies, Year of xxxvii
emigrants 115
Eve (Adam’s wife), disobedience 95
evidence, suppression 33
evil ones, assigned as companions to
disbelievers 318
evildoers, see disbelievers
exodus 8–9, 234; Moses’ people refuse to
enter the holy land 70
Ezekiel 207 n. b
Ezra, ascribed divine sonship 119
fair dealings 177
faith: arguers against faith criticized 370;
evidence for 430; freedom, but choice
determines fate in the Hereafter 295;
purity 444; unity 34, 39
faithful, the success 370
faithfulness, as marks of belief 19
fas al 230 n. b
fasting 20; during pilgrimages 22
fath 442 n. a
fathers: responsibility for children 379;
see also parents; relatives
al-Fatiha ix, 3, 164 n. b, 442 n. a
al-Fayruzabadi xxxiii
the Feast 67, 79
feeble-minded, provision for 51
Final Judgement xvii, xix, 36, 131–3;
condemnation of the polytheists
130–1; Day of 161; and the delay of the
condemnation of evil doers 128–9,
130; timing 107; see also Day of
Judgement
ﬁnance xviii
ﬁshing, during the pilgrimage 77
the ﬂy 214
foetuses, development 428 n. a
food, hunting, during the pilgrimage 67
forceful chargers 407
Forest-Dwellers: arrogance 290; disbelief
as example to those who disbelieve

currently 340; rejection of Shu ayb
236–7
Friday prayer, observance 372–3
al-Furqan (Qur an) xx, 227 n. b
Gabriel (angel) 12, 429; accompanies
Muhammad on the Night Journey and
Ascension to Heaven xi; as the Holy
Spirit 173; revelation of the Qur an ix,
xiv, xv, 137 n. c, 201 n. b, 237, 347, 411,
in obedience to God 194
gambling 24, 76
Garden, see Paradise
gardens, parable of the luscious gardens
183, 185–6
generalizations xxi
God: all-pervasiveness 359; believers’
mindfulness of 4 n. c; beneﬁcence in
granting night and day 250; bounty
166–71, 179, 182; calling upon 301,
302, 304, 305; commands, carrying out
331; creates Adam and expels him from
Eden 7; as creator 98, 128–9, 153, 154,
213, 215, 229–30, 253, 256, 257, 258–9,
261, 262–3, 264, 295, 296, 307–8, 309,
313, 357, 400, 403, 405, and also as
fulﬁller of needs 80–9, and His praise
223–4, of man 401, 402, for man’s
beneﬁt 166–7, 169, 170, 171, and
man’s ingratitude 409, proof of the
Resurrection 209, purpose in creation
327; as decider of victory in war and
distributor of booty 365, 366;
discrimination when judging believers
and disbelievers 291; disobedience
towards forbidden 269; as the
dispenser of forgiveness and
punishment 301, 302; encourages
Muhammad 425, 426; exhortation to
the Children of Israel 7–14; existence
discernible in nature 324; Face 354;
gives guidance and warning to men
424; goodness to believers, as
reinforcement of his instructions 266,
267–8; grace 361, as revelation 384 n.
b, shown in nature 162–3;
grammatical uses when speaking about
xx; invocation 3; as judge 66, 427;
justness 237; as lord of the elements
154; mercy 322; Mercy to Muslims in
sending of Muhammad 372;
muniﬁcence 305, 306, 312–13, 314,

Index
316; Names 107; nature as unseen 4 n.
d; omnipotence 214, 311–12, 376, 416,
418, stressed in relation to disbelievers
382–3; omniscience 136, 143, 144, 226,
263, 272, 310, 363, 367, 376, in
awarding blessing and punishment
348; Oneness 119, 227, 251, 274, 393,
394, 444, and creative activity 295, and
power 215, 218, without oﬀspring
195, 319–20; only God to be given awe
365, 367; only God to be worshipped
295; pledges given to Jews and
Christians 67, 69–76; power 128, 239,
242–3, and creation 281, 282, 284,
contrasted with the powerlessness and
uselessness of the ‘partners’ 277–8,
279–80, extolled 261, and grace 227,
and grace in nature 232, and
knowledge 153–7, and providence
63–4, truths about 347, 348; and
predestination 249–50; pride in
creation, contrasted with disbelievers’
arrogance 324, 326; as protector of
the righteous 325; providence 223,
275; punishment of the People of the
Book who broke faith with
Muhammad 365–6; relations with
xix, believers and disbelievers 5–6,
7–14, 18–19, 29–31, 33, 43–8, 158–61;
relaxes devotional demands 395;
revelation 42; sole worship
demanded 441; sovereignty 36;
speech xx; submission to God as
central tenet of faith 34, 35–6;
supremacy 18; tests claims to truth
267; truth disputed 301, 303, 305;
uniqueness 166, 169; unity xvii,
xx–xxi, 203–4, 208, 213, 285, 289, 293,
307; unity disputed by disbelievers
290; wisdom and majesty 324, 326;
wish that mankind should live in
harmony 339; wonders, in the world
353–4
goddesses, disbelievers’ claims about
refuted 347–8
Gog 189, 207
gold ornaments 316, 317, 318
golden calf 8, 12, 65, 104, 200
Goliath (Philistine leader killed by
David) 29
grammar xix–xx
graves 434

453

guidance: for both believers and
disbelievers 325; God to provide
424; groups responding to 4; plea
3, 4
guilty, trial 250 n. a
hadhf al-jawab 420 n. c
hadith 222 n. a
haﬁz ix
Hagar 18 n. a
Hajj pilgrimage 420; infected by
polytheism x
hakim 39 n. a, 128 n. a
ham 78
Haman: arrogance 254; condemnation
245, 247; disbelief 303
harraka 200 n. b
Harut (angel) 12
Hasan (son of  Ali) xiii
Hayyan, Abu xxxv
heads, shaving 22 n. c
Hell 35, 46, 52, 167, 175, 176, 194, 219,
230, 436; capacity 341; contrasted
with Paradise 353, 354; description
356–7, 397–8; disbelievers’ life
compared to the believers’ bliss in
Paradise 345–6; engulfs sinners 255;
entry of disbelievers into 299–300;
ﬁlling with jinn and men 144; life
293; nature 159, 160; as place of
punishment 319; as reward for
disbelievers 97, 122, 163, 189, 190,
199, 207, 265, 279, 324, 332, 334,
363, 382, 405, 408; and the Tree of
Zaqqum 179, 286, 322, 357;
unremitting nature of punishment in
Hell 304
Hereafter, see afterlife
al-Hijr, people of: disbelief 162, 164; see
also Thamud’s people
Hijra (Migration) xi–xii, xvii, xxxvii
Hira, Cave xi, 397
homosexuality 52; condemnation
242, 253–4, 351; Lot condemns
236
hoopoe, dialogue with Solomon xx,
240
Hour, the see Day of Judgement
household behaviour 220, 222, 225
houses, entering 21
Hud (prophet) 98–9, 159, 329; rejection
235–6; role as prophet invoked as an

454

Index

Hud (prophet) (cont.):
encouragement to Muhammad 136,
139–40
Hudaybiyya (treaty) xxxvii, 334–7, 368
humble, commendation 211
Hunayn (battle) xxxvii, 118
hunting: during the pilgrimage 67;
forbidden during the pilgrimage 77
Husayn (son of  Ali) xiii
husbands, property shares 51
hypocrites: alliances with forbidden
58–9; bad behaviour censured 266,
271; and believers, divisions between
on the Day of Judgement 360;
condemnation for joking about God
122; criticisms 374; failure to support
Muhammad leads to censure 116; fate
331; intrigues 50; judgement 63–4;
Medinan hypocrites condemned 334;
munaﬁqun xviii; response to God’s
guidance 4
ibl 419 n. b
Iblis, see Satan
Ibn  Abbas 215 n. c
Ibn Mandhur xxxiii
Ibn Taymiyya, intertextuality in the
Qur an xxx
Ibn Ubayy (head of the ‘hypocrites’ of
Medina) 365, 366
 idina 165 n. b
idle talk, condemnation 122
idolaters 116–17, 119; attempts to
persuade Muhammad to worship their
gods 441; castigation 209, 210, 213,
214; condemnation, for denying God’s
bounty 166–7, 169; Medinan idolaters
condemned 334, 336
idolatry x, 62, 76; Abraham condemns
205–6, 253, 287, 317; condemnation
207, 259; refuted in face of God’s
power and creation 277–8, 279–80;
rejection 234–5, 237; to be avoided
158, 160–1
Idris: grace 193; prophetic status 207
iftah 442 n. a
ihram (consecration) 22 n. d
ikhlas 444
 Illiyyin 413
iltifat xx, xxxv
impurity, avoidance when praying 55
 Imran, family 34, 37

infanticide: female 169, 411 n. a; as a
result of the fear of poverty, forbidden
177
inheritances 50, 51, 54, 66;
misappropriation condemned 420
insan 420 n. g
insects: ants, and Solomon 239, 240;
bees, activity as evidence of God’s
inspiration 166, 170
interfaith relations xxiv–xxv
international relations xviii
intertextuality xxx
intoxicants and intoxication 24, 55, 76–7,
96 n. c
Iram, tyranny condemned 420
iron 359, 361
Isaac (Abraham’s son) 15, 161, 193, 206,
253; birth prophesied 141, 163–4, 254;
devotion to God 292; God’s guidance
86
Ishmael (Abraham’s son) 15, 18 n. a, 161;
builds the mosque in Mecca 17 n. a;
God’s guidance 86; goodness 292;
grace 193; prophetic status 207;
sacriﬁce 287
Islam: acceptance by Meccans xxxvii;
conversions, attempts to prevent 331;
nature xxiv; spread xiii, xxxvii
Islamic arts and sciences, basis in the
Qur an ix
Isma il (seventh imam) xiii
istifham inkari 7 n. b
ittaka a 345 n. e
Jacob xvii, 145–6, 149, 151, 193, 206, 253;
birth prophesied 141; God’s guidance
86; obedience to God 15, 292
jaza 118 n. e
Jerusalem xi; Night Journey xxxvii, 175;
prayers towards 14 n. a
Jesus xvii, 371; birth and mission 34, 37,
37–9; Christian beliefs in his divinity
seen as false 69; conﬁrmation of the
Torah 72; creation by God 217;
disownment of Christian claims on the
Day of Judgement 78–9; divinity
denied 75, 119, 133, 191, 192, 316,
318–19; divisions among his people
370; as encouragement to believers to
be mindful of God 359, 361; foretells
the coming of Muhammad under the
name of Ahmad 370; God’s guidance

Index
86; as prophet 11, 29, 66; receipt of the
same message as that given to
Muhammad 312; renunciation of
claims to divinity 67; as a sign for all
people 207; as son of God xxxiii;
taken by God 65
Jews and Judaism x; belief in
Muhammad 255 n. a; criticized for
spiritual presumption 372; dietary
regulations 91, 174; distortion of the
Scriptures 55–6; granted tolerance
xii; as People of the Book xviii, and
Islamic relations with xxiv–xxv, xxxvii;
pledges from God and relations with
Muslims 67, 68, 69–76; refusal to enter
the holy land during the exodus
wanderings 70; relations with
Muslims 34, 39–41; see also Children
of Israel; People of the Book
jihad xxxi
jinn: belief in the Qur an 327, 329;
classiﬁcation 353, 354; condemnation
308; creation 163, not needed by God
344; not the revealers of the Qur an
232, 237, 238; reactions to the Qur an
393; as servants of Solomon 292;
subservience to God 289; used as
workers for Solomon 273; worshipped
by disbelievers 275
jizya 118 n. e
Job: blessing after aﬄiction 292; God’s
guidance 86; prophetic status 206–7
John (son of Zachariah) 191, 207; God’s
guidance 86
joking, joking about God condemned 122
Jonah 128, 135, 288; God’s guidance 86;
prophetic status 207; shown God’s
mercy 385–6
Jonah’s people, repentance 135
Joseph xvii, 145–52; God’s guidance 86;
rejection by disbelievers 303
judgement, see Day of Judgement; Final
Judgement
judges, bribing forbidden 21; women as
judges xxv, xxvi
justice: administration 56, by
Muhammad for the People of the Book
72, 72–3; bearing witness impartially
68–9
Ka ba 77, 345; building by Abraham and
Ishmael 15; building and pilgrimages

455

to x; centrality to qibla and rites of
pilgrimage 18 n. c; guardians 112;
pilgrims’ disgraceful acts 96 n. a
kafur 401 n. b
Karbala (battle) xiii
kawthar 440 n. a
Khadija (Muhammad’s wife) x–xi,
xxxvii
khalifa (successor) 7 n. a
al-Khattab,  Umar ibn, conversion to
Islam xxxvii
kingship, in Israel 28–9
kinship ties 50
knowing (zanna) 8 n. a
Korah, disbelief 303
Koran, see Qur an
la yubdi wa-la yu id 275 n. a
al-Lat (Arabian pagan goddess) 347
learning/knowing xiv n. 4
legal texts xviii–xix
legislation, reinforcements 78 n. b
lesbian acts 52
life saving 71
Light, Verse 220, 223
livestock: creation for man’s beneﬁt 166,
170, 284; dedication and use 211;
intended for man’s use 215;
polytheists’ regulations refuted 90–1;
see also animals
loans xxvi
Lot 141–2; blessing 288; condemns
homosexuality 253–4; God’s
guidance 86; as messenger 100;
rejection 236, 242; salvation and
prophetic status 164, 206; seeks refuge
in God 253
Lot, people 212; arrogance 290; disbelief
as example to those who disbelieve
currently 340, 344; as disbelievers
141–2; punishment 351
Lot, wife, disbelief 381
lote trees 273, 347
Luqman the Wise 261, 262
Luther, Martin xxxvii
Madina, see Medina
Magians 210, 210 n. c
Magog 189, 207
Malik (angel in charge of Hell) 319
Manat (pagan diety) 347
man: birth and resurrection 417;

456

Index

man: birth and resurrection (cont.):
creation 163, 166, 171, 215, 305, and
ability to communicate 353, created for
toil and trial 422; denial of the Day of
Resurrection 399–400; disputes
creation by God 284; homosexual acts
52; ingratitude condemned 409, 412;
obsession with wealth condemned 434,
436; self-satisfaction 428; testing 183,
298, 401–2; see also mankind
mankind: creation 264, not needed by
God 344; divisions at the Day of
Judgement 356–8; God’s knowledge
about as shown by the receptors at the
Day of Judgement 340–1; need of
God 278; powerlessness on the Day of
Resurrection 341; unity and harmony
among 339; see also men
marriage xviii, 220, 222–3; blessing by
God 258; commendation of 53;
forbidden degrees 52–3; intermarriage
between Muslims and women of the
People of the Book 68; intermarriage
with pagans forbidden 25;
intermarriage with those of other
faiths xxv; Muhammad’s conduct
dictated by God 270; remarriage and
divorce 25–8, 266 n. a; treatment of
believing and disbelieving women and
their marriage dowries 369; see also
divorce
martyrdom 282 n. a
martyrs: testimony 44 n. b
Marut (angel) 12
Marwa 18
Mary (mother of Jesus) 34, 37–8, 65,
66, 75, 191–2, 207, 217; belief 381;
denial of Christian claims for her
divinity 79
matta a 288 n. b
mawla 266 n. b
Mecca x; attacked by the army of
Abraha 437, 438; believers barred from
when on pilgrimage 209, 211;
establishment by God 249; God warns
87; as guarantee of God’s oath 422,
427; as one of the two cities 317 n. b;
pilgrimages 41, ordinances governing
21–3; as point of departure in the
Night Journey 175; prayers towards
14 n. a, 17; prosperity prayed for by
Abraham 158, 160–1; sacred character

does not deny believers the right of
self-defence xxiii; as sanctuary 256;
surrender 359 n. b; surrender to
Muhammad 442; warnings to 311
Meccan disbelievers 170 n. d; arguments
answered 345, 346; assertions denied
191; claims that the angels are God’s
daughters 183 n. a; condemned along
with the arrogant 245; denial of the
Resurrection 407; opposition to
Muhammad’s teachings xi;
punishment 272, 351–2; see also
disbelievers
Meccans 321; attacks on Muhammad
and his followers allow engagement
in self-defence xxii–xxiii; conversion
to Islam xii; iniquitous behaviour
of those who attempted to expel
Muhammad 331; religious beliefs
prior to conversion to Islam xvii;
Resurrection denied 322; tardiness
in believing in the Qur an 327
mediation 58
Medina x, xi–xii; besieged by
disbelievers at the Battle of the
Trench 266; Muhammad’s death
xiii
Medinans, commended for believing acts
127
menstruation, sexual intercourse
forbidden during 25
messengers: as commissioned by God
306; mocked 80, 82; persistence in
testifying to disbelievers 308;
rejection 173; rejection by
disbelievers 168; role 159, 176; see also
prophets
Michael (archangel) 12
Midianites 122, 212; condemnation for
the rejection of Shu ayb 254; as
disbelievers 100–1, 142–3
migrants 60
Migration (Hijra) xi–xii, xvii, xxxvii
mihrab 273 n. a
milk-mothers 52
milk-sisters 52
min 42 n. a
min anfusikum 50 n. a
Mina 22 n. f, 23 n. b
minbar 373 n. a
mindfulness (w-q-y) 4 n. c
miracles 178–9

Index
mischief-makers, condemned as
evildoers 339
misdeeds, minor misdeeds cancelled by
God 53
Mistah (relative of  A isha) 221 n. c
modesty 220, 222, 225
monasticism 361
monotheism 92, 93
moon: crescent moons, and the timing of
pilgrimages 21; rising and setting 353;
splitting in two at the Day of
Judgement 350; and sun, as evidence
of God’s creative power 282; worship
x; see also sun
Moses xvii, 8–9, 11, 12, 64, 65, 175,
245–8, 348; blessing 288;
commissioning at the burning bush
239–40; divisions among his people
370; as encouragement to Muhammad
143, 407; God’s guidance 86; and the
Golden calf 196–200; grace 193;
guiltlessness before God 271; and the
Jews’ refusal to enter the holy land
during the exodus wanderings 70;
meeting with unidentiﬁed ﬁgure 183,
187–8; as messenger 101–5, 134;
mission to Pharaoh’s people 232–4,
322; and the plagues 318; as prophet
229, 254; receipt of the same message
as that given to Muhammad 312;
receives the Scriptures 205, 265, 310;
rejection 212; rejection by
disbelievers 217; rejection by Pharaoh
and his people 344; reminds the
Children of Israel of God’s
providence 158; sister 245–6; victory
301, 302–4
Moses, mother 245–6
mosques: ﬁrst mosque built at Yathrib
xii; mosque built by hypocrites
condemned 125–6; those qualiﬁed to
tend 117–18
mothers: property shares 51; see also
relatives
Mount Judi (resting place for Noah’s
Ark) 139
Mount of Mercy xii
Mount Sinai 9, 12, 65, 248; God swears
by 345
mubin 353 n. b
Mufradat 76 n. a
muhajirun xii

457

Muhammad ix, x–xiii, xxxvii; accused of
being mad 272, 275, 384; allowed
self-defence against Meccan attacks
xxii–xxiii; assured of abundance from
God, in place of the loss of his last son
440; believers’ respect for 270–1;
comforted in face of accusations of his
being a liar 277, 278; commanded to be
faithful to God 237–8; commanded to
persist in his proclamations 346;
commanded to preach God’s word
344; commanded to read 428;
commended to the support of his
followers as a sign of their loyalty to
God 334–5; defence before the
disbelievers 275; disbelievers’
rejections denounced 227, 229;
disobedience towards forbidden 269;
divine commission to reveal the
Qur an 281; divine source of his
message 347; encouragement by God
425, 426; encouragement 128, 135,
152, 162–5, 196, 202, 327, 330, by the
examples of earlier prophets 290,
291–2, perseverance and patience 191,
194, 384, 385–6, 401, 402, and ignore
the taunts of disbelievers 301, 304,
305–6, remain close to God 309,
through references to David and
Solomon 272, 273; as encouragement
to believers to be mindful of God 359;
exhortation to constancy 254–5;
exhorted not to be saddened by
disbelief 261, 262; exhorted to remain
steadfast in the face of disbelief 243–4;
exhorted to follow God’s clear religious
path 325; exhorted to obey God 269;
exhorted to pay no attention to
disbelievers 264; exhorted to
persevere 257, 258–9; ﬂees from
Mecca and hides in a cave xxx;
followers, indignant at the treaty made
at Hudaybiyya 334, 336; home life
380; instructed on recitation of the
Qur an 399; instructed to speak to
believers and disbelievers 274; insults
condemned 121; lacking in miraculous
powers 181; madness denied by God
411; marriages 270; as ‘Messenger’ xv;
as model for believers 268; name
mentioned 331; obedience towards
56–7, 58, 61, 220, 224; opponents and

458

Index

Muhammad (cont.):
their reward 23; as Prophet 44–5;
prophetic character xvii, 203, 205, 208,
aﬃrmation 285, and lack of miraculous
powers 175; rebuked for attention to
disbelieving nobles and inattention to a
blind enquirer 409; reminded that he
cannot convert everyone and should
remain steadfast 245, 248, 249;
revelation of the Qur an xiv–xv;
revelations, and their truths 94, 107–9;
role 153, 156, as the messenger of God
to the People of the Book 70, in
warning and giving good news 136,
137, 143–4; sending by God 17;
sending as God’s grace 372; tempting
by disbelievers 180; testimony to the
Meccan Arabs 394; truth aﬃrmed by
God 387, 388; vision of pilgrimage to
Mecca 334, 336; witness 166, 172; as
witness against the polytheists 172;
wives, believers’ conduct towards 266,
instructions to 268–9
Mujahid 397 n. c
munaﬁqun (hypocrites) xviii
muqwin 357 n. a
murder 71; of believers by believers
59–60; fair retribution for 20;
forbidden 53, 177
Muslims 214; exhorted to obey God in all
things lest their good deeds come to
nothing 331, 333; instructions for
172–4; as the just 16; migrate to
Abyssinia seeking refuge from
persecution xi, xxxvii; not to ally
themselves with their Meccan enemies
368, 369; relations with Jews and
Christians 15–16, 34, 39–42, 67, 68,
69–76; spiritual growth as grace from
God 372; tensions with the People of
the Book 50, 55–6
mutual neglect, among those being
judged on the Day of Judgement 376
Muzdalifa, plain 22 n. f
al-Nadr ibn al-Harith, condemnation for
attempting to mislead others 261 n. a
nahr xxxii
nar 239 n. a
nasakha 212 n. a
nashaza 54 n. a
nazi at 407 n. a

needy, neglect, the result of denial of
Judgement 439
night, and day, as evidence of God’s
creative power 282
Night of Glory 429
Night Journey and Ascension to Heaven
xi, xxxvii, 175, 179, 347
night-comer 417
Nimrod 416 n. b
Noah xvii, 175; chosen by God 37;
contemporaries condemned 122;
dialogue with God xx; as
encouragement to believers to be
mindful of God 359, 361; God’s
guidance 86; preaching and prayer for
the destruction of disbelievers before
the Flood 391–2; as prophet 98–9, 133,
159, 216; receipt of the same message as
that given to Muhammad 312;
rejection 235; role as prophet invoked
as an encouragement to Muhammad
138–9; salvation 287, 350; salvation and
rejection by his own people 253
Noah, people 212; arrogance 290;
destruction 229, 348; disbelief as
example to those who disbelieve
currently 340, 344; as disbelievers
159, 216; punishment 301, 303;
rejection of Noah and their
punishment 350
Noah, wife, disbelief 381
Noah’s Ark 138–9, 216, 253, 282–3, 387
nobles, salvation 83 n. b
non-combatants, and combatants 60
oathbreaking: atonement for 76;
criticisms 370; forbidden 172; God
prevents Job from oathbreaking 292
oathtaking 25; release from 380
obedience: given to God alone 365, 367;
to Muhammad 56–7, 58, 61, 220, 224
oppressed, defence, permits the taking up
of arms xxii
oppression, punishments for 314
orphans: care 425; cruelty to, the result of
denial of Judgement 439; orphan girls,
treatment 62; property 177, and its
disposal 50–1, management 25, 92;
see also children
pagans: intermarriage with forbidden 25;
Meccan pagans, dispute about the

Index
angels as daughters of God 195,
rejoicing at the defeat of the Byzantines
by the Persians 257 n. a
Palmer, E. H., translation of the Qur an
xxvii, xxxviii
Paradise 51–2, 167–8; admission to
Paradise includes absolution from bad
deeds 334; believers’ bliss compared to
the disbelievers’ life in Hell 345–6;
contrast between the two levels of
Paradise 354–5; description 356, and
seen as the reward of believers 332;
entry into 13, 300; entry into Paradise
preceded by persecution 24; life 283,
286, 292–3; nature in the light
of Arabic structures and idioms
xxxi–xxxii; as the objective of believers
360–1; resting place for believers 97; as
reward of believers 6, 35, 44, 49, 56,
122, 124, 125, 126, 129, 143, 155, 156,
160, 163, 185, 190, 199, 210, 213, 215,
228, 251, 255, 258, 261, 265, 279, 319,
322–3, 328, 341, 343, 379, 385, 401–2,
408, 413, 416; as reward for truthful
Christians 76, 79; as the reward of the
godly 62; as the reward of those who
repent 194
paragraphs, use in translation xxxiv
parents: property shares 51; relations
with as the mark of believers and
disbelievers 328; respect for except in
the case of disbelief 262; respect for
176; respect for and obedience to 252;
see also children; fathers; mothers;
relatives
peace xviii
pearls 353; treatment 345 n. f
the pen xiv n. 4
People of the Book xviii; and God’s
grace 359, 361; lack of faithfulness to
treaty leads God to drive them from
their homes 365–6; misdeeds 64–5,
66, 430; rebels to be fought 118–19;
relations with xxiv–xxv; rewards for
faith 49; tensions with Muslims 50,
55–6; see also Children of Israel;
Christians; Jews and Judaism
‘Perfecting the blessing’ 68 n. b
persecution 17–18; contrasted with
God’s punishment 252
Persians, attacks on the Byzantines 257
personal responsibility 176, 398; in

459

choosing good or evil 424; in conduct
325; on the Day of Judgement 322;
and ﬁnal rewards 348; in matters of
belief 14, 15, 16, 311, 314, 345; for sin
252–3
Pharaoh: arrogance 254, 290;
condemnation 245, 247–8;
destruction 301, 302–4; disbelief 134,
143, 197–9; dreams, interpreted by
Joseph 148; drowning 181;
punishment 318, 387, 395; rejects
God’s word brought by Moses 232–4;
rejects Moses 101–2, 217, 240; as
reminder to disbelievers 407; tyranny
condemned 420
Pharaoh, people: condemnation 416;
disbelief as example to those who
disbelieve currently 340, 343;
punishment 351
Pharaoh, wife, belief 381
Pharaoh’s people: destruction 229; as
disbelievers 101–3, 114, 134, 143;
punishment 318; reject Moses 217,
240, 247–8; rejection of God’s word
233–4; summoned to repent by a
believer 303–4; testing through the
mission of Moses 322; treatment
of the Children of Israel and death in
the Red Sea 8; see also Pharaoh;
Pharaoh, people
Pickthall, Muhammad Marmaduke,
translation of the Qur an xxvii–xxviii,
xxxviii
pilgrimages: hunting for food 67;
hunting forbidden but ﬁshing allowed
77; minor pilgrimages ( umra) 18, 18
n. b; ordinances governing 21–3; rite,
as enacted by Abraham 209, 211
pledges 172, 177; observance 155, as
marks of belief 19; as received from
God 67, 69–76; taken from the Jews by
God 74–5
plenty, as a test 394
poets 232, 238
polygamy 50
polytheism x, xvii; advocation by parents
condemned 252; among Hud’s people
140; condemnation 176, 204, 254, 256,
258, 259, 318, 320, at the Final
Judgement 129, 130–1; condemned by
Luqman 261; denial 257–8, 274;
denunciation 227, 228, 229, 230, 245,

460

Index

polytheism (cont.):
249, 250, 251; forbidden 177,
178; Muhammad’s opposition
to xi; rejection 239, 242–3, 284,
312, 327, 329; worthless nature
133
polytheists: beliefs refuted 92, 93;
condemnation for denying God’s
bounty 166–72; contrasted with
believers 295–9; false beliefs refuted
80–9; not to tend mosques 117–18;
prayers on behalf of hostile relatives
condemned 126; relations with in
the event of persecution xxiii–xxiv;
uncleanness 118; see also
disbelievers
prayer direction (qibla) 14 n. a, 16–17, 18
n. c, 19
prayers 254–5; avoidance of impurity 55;
cleansing before prayer 68; conduct
during war 60–1; when in danger 27;
formal prayer (salah) 5 n. a; as
marks of belief 19; rewards in the
Hereafter 23
praying for show, the result of denial of
Judgement 439
predestination 203, 249–50, 252, 253,
264, 297; God decides between
believers and disbelievers 259,
260
pride 177
privacy, respect for 225
privation, as a test 394 n. a
pronouns, use xxxii–xxxiii
property 50; disposal 50–1, 51–2, 53, 54;
management for orphans 92;
protection xxvi; restoration 56; right
use of personal property 21
prophets xvii–xviii; God’s aﬃrmation,
after removing Satan’s insinuations
from their messages 212–13; Children
of Israel’s treatment of 11–12;
continuity 311, 312; disbelievers in the
prophets condemned 252, 253–4, 255,
256; as encouragement to believers to
be mindful of God 359, 361; examples
used as support and encouragement for
Muhammad 290, 291–2; followers and
their reactions 232–7; grace 191, 193–
4; as messengers 203, 205–7; as muslim
xxiv; perseverance in spite of rejection
162–5; rejection 281–2; rejection by

disbelievers 216–17, 219, 228–9, and
their consequent destruction 239,
239–40, 241–2; rejection by the people
of  Ad 327, 329; rejection as liars 277,
278; revelations to 65; role 56; role an
encouragement to Muhammad 136,
138–44; sending by God 29; stories
287–8; wealth discounted as a measure
of a prophet’s truth 316, 317–18; see
also messengers
providence, God’s control 275, 361
punctuation xxxiv–xxxv
punishments: for adultery 71 n. b; eternal
nature in the afterlife 200; for
persecution of Muslims by the People
of the Book 71; for theft 71; in this life
and the Hereafter 387
Qarun: arrogance 254; condemnation
245, 250–1
qasr 403 n. c
qibla (prayer direction) 14 n. a, 16–17, 18
n. c, 19
Queen of Sheba 240–1; dialogue xx
Qur an ix–x, xxxvii–xxxviii; acceptance
248–9; authenticity 128; belittling
232; as both joyful news and warning
239; canonization xvi n. 8;
compilation xv–xvi; consistency as
evidence of its origin 58; disbelievers
mock 217; disbelievers’ rejections
denounced 227, 230; divine origins
xiv n. 3, 131, 162, 232, 237, not
poetry made by man 281, 284; ease of
understanding 350, 351; eﬀects upon
believers 297; extent 190; ﬁnal
revelation xiii; ﬁrst revelation on the
Night of Glory 429; as a gift revealed
from God 279; gives knowledge about
the Hour of Judgement 319; as God’s
word 399; as guidance 175, 176–82,
187, 201; interpretation xxi–xxvi;
Koran xxvi; mercy 321; opponents
warned of punishment 165; as reading
353 n. a; recitation 180; rejection by
disbelievers 415; responses to
determine fate at the Day of
Judgement 137; revelation xi, xiv–xv,
170, 181–2, 183, 196, 200, 201, 203,
205, 210, 213, 255, 347, 357, 379;
revelation questioned by disbelievers
229; role 145; structure xvi–xvii;

Index
stylistic features xix–xxi; themes
xvii–xix; translations, conventions
used xxix–xxxvi, in English
xxvi–xxix; truth 94, 264, 307, 309,
324, 411, aﬃrmed by God 387, 388,
disbelievers’ rejection and their
destruction 327–8, 329, and nobility
290, 294; see also ayas; suras
Quraysh (tribe), trading journeys 438
r-b-b 3 n. d
al-Raghib 76 n. a
rahim 3 n. b
rahman 3 n. a
rain, illustrative of the concept of
resurrection 419 n. b
ra ina 13, 55
Ramadan: obligations xix; observances
20–1
al-Raqim 183
al-Rass, people: destruction 229;
disbelief as example to those who
disbelieve currently 340
al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din xxxv, xxxvi
reading xiv, xiv n. 4, xv
rebellious, allowed to stray 370
reconciliation, commendation 61
refugees, Muslim refugees, to be
rewarded by God 366
refugees from persecution, rewards 168,
173
relatives: prayers on behalf of hostile
relatives condemned 126; treatment
172; see also children; fathers; mothers;
parents
religion, unity 311, 312
religious divisions 311, 312
religious tolerance 29; at Yathrib xii
remarriage, see divorce; marriage
repentance 52, 125, 295, 297, 299;
disbelievers’ repentance, when faced by
Hell 382; and entry to Paradise 194;
essential that it take place before the
Day of Judgement 302, 306, 321, 421;
in the face of God’s punishment in this
life 384–5; futility at the arrival of the
Hour 332; God’s transformation of
those who repent 230–1; and its
rewards 249; urged on by the decline
of the day 435
Resurrection xvii, xviii, 30, 168, 277, 302
n. a, 340, 433; aﬃrmation 376;

461

assurance 178; coming 417; creation
as evidence of God’s ability to resurrect
the dead 340, 341–2; denied by the
Meccans 322; disbelievers’ denial
questioned 264, 389, 390; disbelievers
reject 216, 243; inevitability 215,
218–19, 307, 407; mistaken beliefs
about 393; proof seen in the creative
power of God 209; reality 281, 283,
427; truth, disbelievers’ rejection and
their destruction 327–8, 329–30;
winds as illustration 343; see also Day
of Resurrection
retaliation xix
retribution 177
revelation 311, 314–15
rhetorical questions xxxii
righteous, commendation and entry into
Paradise 167–8
Rightly Guided Caliphs xiii
rivers, in Paradise xxxii
Rodwell, J. M., translation of the Qur an
xxvii, xxxviii
Ross, Alexander, translation of the
Qur an xxvii, xxxvii
Sabbath, obligatory nature 174
Sabians 9 n. a, 74, 210
Sacred Months 77; observance 119
sacriﬁces, oﬀering for, during
pilgrimages 22
Safa 18
safe conduct xxiv
Safwan (companion of  A’isha), falsely
suspected of adultery 220
sa iba 78
sa id 55 n. b
sajada 154 n. b
salah (formal prayer) 5 n. a
salam 356 n. a
Sale, George, translation of the Qur an
xxxviii
Salih: dialogue xx; as messenger 99–100,
159; rejection 236, 241–2, 351; role as
prophet invoked as an encouragement
to Muhammad 140–1; see also
Thamud, people
Salsabil (spring in Paradise) 401
samad 444 n. a
al-Samiri (induced some of the Children
of Israel to worship golden calf) 199,
200

462

Index

sand dunes, place of destruction of the
people of  Ad 327, 329
Satan 23, 85; as the ally of disbelievers
362, 363, 364; as an evil companion
54; arrogance linked with that of
Meccan disbelievers 290;
disobedience 7, 186; disowns men
whom he has misled 367; duping of
Medinan Jews into rejecting
Muhammad 333; incites enmity and
hatred through intoxicants and
gambling 76; insinuation of evil into
the messages of the prophets 212–13;
invocation against 446; as a liar 277;
as man’s enemy 178, 179, 228, 319;
opinion of the people of Sheba 273–4;
as patron of idolaters 170;
personiﬁcation of danger through
temptation 162, 163; power 172;
promises false 160; rebelliousness
193; refusal to be subservient to man
94–5, 293; stoning 23 n. b; supporters
to be ﬂung into Hell 235; as tempter
31, 56, 108, 175, 201, 283, of  Ad and
Thamud 254, of believers 19, 47, of
disbelievers in battle 113, of the
people of the Queen of Sheba 240;
ungratefulness 176; weakness 57;
worship condemned 62
Saul (Talut) (king) 28–9
sawm 192 n. a
Scriptures: comparison between good and
evil words 160; conﬁrmation by the
Qur an 34, 40; as gift to the Children
of Israel 175, 265; given to Moses 310;
given to Moses and Aaron 205; Jewish
attitudes towards 72; Jewish scriptures,
as containing the same message as the
Qur an 418; meaning as a whole
known to God alone 34; non-Islamic
scriptures xxiv; origins in God 92–3;
reactions to 24; revelation after
Abraham 39; revelation by Moses
before the revelation of the Qur an
328; treatment by disbelievers 48; see
also Torah
self-defence xxi; allowable 314;
permission xii, 212; permits the taking
up of arms xxii–xxiii; permitted
during pilgrimage 21–2, 24; to be kept
in proportion 174
self-destruction 22 n. b

senses, testimony against disbelievers at
the Day of Judgement 307, 308
‘sent down’ xv
sexual intercourse 25; during Ramadan
20–1
shafa a 58 n. a
shahid (martyr) 44 n. b
Shaytan, see Satan
Sheba, people 272, 273–4
Shi is xiii
ships 354; given by God for man’s
beneﬁt 324; as signs of God’s
providence 313
shirk (polytheism) xvii
short measure, cheating by giving short
measure condemned 413–14
Shu ayb, as messenger 100–1; rejection
236–7, 254; role as prophet invoked as
an encouragement to Muhammad
142–3
shura (consultation) 311, 314
Sijjin 413
silm 23 n. c
sin, committing 61
Sirius (star worshipped by the Arabs)
347, 348
sisters: inheritances 66; property shares
51
skies: collapse, as evidence of judgement
346; creation, as evidence of God’s
power 340
slaves 258; denied provisions by the
disbelievers 170; marriage with 50
n. e, 53; respect for their owners’
privacy 225; treatment 223
Sleepers of the Cave 183–5
smoke, as reference to the Day of
Judgement 321
Solomon 12; blessing 291–2; cited as
encouragement to Muhammad 272,
273; dialogue xx; God’s guidance 86;
prophetic status 206; and the Queen of
Sheba 239, 240–1
sons, property shares 51
souls: corruption 423; creation 50;
peace 421; puriﬁcation 423; testing 33
spider 252, 254
spiritual and temporal rewards 249,
312–13, 313–14
successor (khalifa) 7 n. a
suicide 22 n. b
sujud 428 n. d

Index
Summoner, activity at the Day of
Judgement 350
sun: and moon, as evidence of
God’s creative power 282; pagan
worship x; rising and setting 353; see
also moon
Sunnis xiii
suras ix, xvi–xvii; alphabetical
introductions 4 n. a; contents xix;
introductions xxxv; introductory
formula 116; Meccan and Medinan
suras xvii–xix; Meccan suras 80, 94,
128, 136, 145, 158, 162, 166, 183, 191,
196, 203, 215, 227, 232, 239, 245, 252,
257, 261, 264, 272, 277, 281, 285, 290,
295, 301, 307, 311, 316, 321, 324, 327,
340, 343, 345, 347, 350, 356, 382, 384,
387, 389, 391, 393, 395, 399, 403, 405,
407, 409, 411, 412, 413, 415, 416, 417,
418, 419, 420, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426,
427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434,
435, 436, 438, 439, 440, 441, 443, 445,
446; Medinan suras 4, 34, 50, 67, 110,
116, 153, 209, 220, 266, 331, 334, 338,
353, 359, 362, 365, 368, 370, 372, 374,
376, 378, 380, 395, 401, 442;
punctuation xxxiv–xxxv; revelation,
and the response of disbelievers 127;
see also al-Fatiha
Suyuti ix
‘sword verse’ xxiii–xxiv
Syria x
ta ha 196 n. a
tabarak 227 n. a, 382 n. b
Tabari 74 n. a
Tabuk, expedition to xxxvii
taghut 56 n. b
Ta if, as one of the two cities 317 n. b
Talut (Saul) (King) 28–9
tamattu 22 n. d
taqwa xxxi
Tasnim, water 413
taxation 118
temporal life, contrast with afterlife
256
temporal and spiritual rewards 249,
312–13, 313–14
testimonies, in court, and women’s status
xxv–xxvi
Thamud, people 122, 159, 212;
arrogance 290; arrogance and

463

corruption of soul 423; condemnation
254, 416; destruction 229, 348;
dialogue xx; as disbelievers 99–100,
140–1, 159, 179, 340, 343; punishment
303, 308, 351; punishment denied 387;
rejection of Salih 236, 241–2; tyranny
condemned 420; see also Salih
thaqal 354 n. c
theft, punishments for 71
Torah: conﬁrmation by Jesus 72; see also
Scriptures
torments, as punishment for Egyptian
disbelief 318
trade and trading xviii, 53, 301 n. a;
allowed by God 32–3; permitted on
pilgrimages 22 n. e
travel, under God’s providence 313
treaties, treaty obligations with
polytheists 116–17
treaty obligations 115
Trench (battle) xii, xxxvii, 266, 267–8
Trinity 290 n. b; belief in the Trinity
forbidden 66; denial 75
trust, given to mankind 61
truth, God tests claims to truth 267
Tubba , people 321, 322; disbelief 340
tyrants, condemnation by God 420–1
Uhud (battle) xii, xxxvii, 34, 44 n. a,
45–7, 365
 Umar (Rightly Guided Caliph) xiii
Umayyads xiii
ummi 105 n. a
unzurna 13, 13 n. a, 55
 uqba 423 n. d
usury: condemnation 31–2, 259;
forbidden 44
 Uthman (Rightly Guided Caliph) xiii;
preservation of the Qur an xvi, xxxvii
 Uthmanic Codex xvi
al- Uzza (Arabian pagan goddess) 347
w-q-y (mindfulness) 4 n. c
walad xxxiii, 183 n. a, 195 n. b
al-Walid ibn al-Mughira 384 n. c, 397
war xviii, xxiii, xxiv
war elephants, presence in the army of
Abraha 437
war and warfare: conduct 28, 57–9, 60–1,
331; disbelievers’ lack of success
dictated by God 336; disbelievers
refuse to ﬁght in case this should break

464

Index

war and warfare: (cont.):
kinship ties 332; persistence in war
commanded by God in God’s cause
333; rewards given to believers for
faithfulness in the conduct of war
335–6; sacred duty of ﬁghting in God’s
way and condemnation of those who
hold back 119–20, 123–4, 126, 127;
self-defence in the sacred months 119
warfare 50
warhorses, God’s oath concerning 432
warnings, to be given by Muhammad,
even where they are ignored 418
wasila 78
water, fresh and salt water established by
God 353
Ways of Ascent 389
wealth: display forbidden 54; hoarding
forbidden 119
wealthy: arrogance reprimanded 384;
condemnation for preferring their
possessions to ﬁghting in God’s cause
123–4; obduracy and punishment 321
weights: fair weights 142; use of correct
weights commanded 237
Weiss, Leopold (Muhammad Asad),
translation of the Qur an xxviii–xxix
widows, remarriage 27
winds 403; scattering winds, as proof of
the Resurrection 343
witchcraft, invocation against 445
wives: conduct towards 266; fair
treatment of 62–3; property shares 51
women: beautiful women as precious as
ostrich eggs 286 n. c; believing and
disbelieving women 380, 381; in
childbirth 154; clothing 271; divorced
women, and provision for 28;
inheritance of women as property
forbidden 52; lewd acts between 52;
marriage 50; regulations concerning
50; relatives’ prevention of

reconcilation with divorced husbands
forbidden 26 n. b; status xxv–xxvi;
status as witnesses 32; treatment
62–3, of believing and disbelieving
women and their marriage dowries
369, during divorce 378–9, when
convicted of adultery 53, within
marriage 52, 54; with whom marriage
is forbidden 52–3
words: classical meanings xxxiii;
meanings determined by contexts
xxx–xxxi
world, end 353, 354
worldly existence, transitory nature
360
worship: kneeling posture used for 324,
325; postures in worship 428
writing, signiﬁcance for the Qur an xv
n. 6
writing ability 384 n. a
wrongdoers, protected only by each other
325
wujuh 55 n. d
wujuh al-Qur an xxx–xxxi
Yamama (battle) xvi
yankihu 220 n. c
Yathrib, see Medina
Year of Grief xi
Yemen x
yunﬁquna (charitable spending) 5 n. b
Zachariah 191; God’s guidance 86;
prophetic status 207
zakah 118 n. e
zanna (act of knowing) 8 n. a
Zaqqum, Tree of 179, 286, 322, 357
Zayd (Muhammad’s adopted son) 269
Zaynab (Muhammad’s cousin) 269 n. a
zina 220 n. a
Zoroastrians 210, 210 n. c
zurq 200 n. c

